The Constitution of Nepal
Date of Publication in Nepal Gazette
September 20, 2015
Amendments:
1. The Constitution of Nepal (First Amendment), 2016
2. The Constitution of Nepal (Second Amendment), 2020
February 28, 2016
June 18, 2020

Preamble:
WE, THE SOVEREIGN PEOPLE OF NEPAL;

INTERNALIZING the people's sovereign right and right to autonomy and self-rule, while  maintaining freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity, national unity, independence and  dignity of Nepal;

RECALLING the glorious history of historic people's movements, armed struggle, dedication  and sacrifice of Nepali people carried out, from time to time, for the sake of interests of the  nation, democracy and progressive changes, and respecting for the martyrs, disappeared  persons and victimized citizens;

ELIMINATING all forms of discrimination and oppression resulted from the feudalistic,  autocratic, centralized, unitary system of governance of the State;

PROTECTING and promoting unity in diversity, social and cultural solidarity, tolerance and  harmony, by recognizing the multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-religious, multi-cultural and  geographically diverse characteristics; and resolving to build an egalitarian society based on  the proportional inclusive and participatory principles in order to ensure economic equality,  prosperity and social justice by eliminating discrimination based on class, caste, region,  language, religion and gender and all forms of caste-based untouchability;


BEING COMMITTED to socialism based on democratic norms and values including the  people's competitive multiparty democratic system of governance, civil liberties, fundamental  rights, human rights, adult franchise, periodic elections, full freedom of the press, and  independent, impartial and competent judiciary and concept of the rule of law in order to  build a prosperous nation;

DESIRING to fulfil aspirations for sustainable peace, good governance, development and  prosperity through the federal democratic republican system of governance;

DO HEREBY ADOPT AND PROMULGATE THIS CONSTITUTION THROUGH THE
CONSTITUENT
ASSEMBLY.


Part-1
Preliminary
1.
Constitution as Fundamental Law: (1) This Constitution is the fundamental law of
Nepal. Any law inconsistent with this Constitution shall, to the extent of such  inconsistency, be void.


(2) It shall be the duty of every person to uphold this Constitution.
2.
Sovereignty and State Power: The sovereignty and State power of Nepal shall be  vested in the Nepali people. It shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions set  forth in this Constitution.
3.
Nation: All the Nepali people, with multi-ethnic, multi-lingual, multi-religious, multi- cultural characteristics and in geographical diversities, and having common aspirations  and being united by a bond of allegiance to national independence, territorial integrity,  national interest and prosperity of Nepal, collectively constitute the nation.
4.
State of Nepal: (1) Nepal is an independent, indivisible, sovereign, secular, inclusive,  democratic, socialism-oriented, federal democratic republican State.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "secular" means religious,  cultural freedoms, including protection of religion and culture handed down from time  immemorial.
(2) The territory of Nepal shall comprise the following:-
(a)
The territory existing at the time of commencement of this
Constitution, and
(b)
Such other territory as may be acquired after the commencement of  this Constitution.
5.
National Interest: (1) Safeguarding of the freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity,  nationality, independence and dignity of Nepal, the rights of the Nepali people, border  security, economic wellbeing and prosperity shall be the basic elements of the national  interest of Nepal.


(2) Any conduct and act contrary to the national interest shall be punishable in  accordance with the federal law.


6.
Languages of Nation: All languages spoken as the mother tongues in Nepal are the  languages of the nation.
7.
Official Language: (1) The Nepali language in the Devnagari script shall be the  official language of Nepal.


(2) A Province may, by a provincial law, determine one or more than one  languages of the nation spoken by a majority of people within the Province as its  official language or languages, in addition to the Nepali language.


(3) Other matters relating to language shall be as decided by the Government  of Nepal on recommendation of the Language Commission.
8.
National Flag: (1) The national flag of Nepal consists of two juxtaposed triangular  figures with a crimson-coloured base and deep blue borders, there being a white  emblem of the crescent moon with eight rays visible out of sixteen in the upper part  and a white emblem of a twelve rayed sun in the lower part.
(2) The method of drawing out the flag and other particulars relating thereto  shall be as provided for in Schedule-1.
9.
National Anthem and so on:  (1) The national anthem of Nepal shall be as set forth in
Schedule-2.

(2) The coat-of-arms of Nepal shall be as set forth in Schedule-3.

(3) The Rhododendron Arboreum shall be the national flower, Crimson Colour  shall be the national colour, Cow shall be the national animal and Lophophorus shall  be the national bird of Nepal.


Part-2
Citizenship
10.
Not to Deprive of Citizenship: (1) No citizen of Nepal shall be deprived of the right to  obtain citizenship.


(2) Provision of single federal citizenship with provincial identity has been  made in Nepal.
11.
To be Citizens of Nepal: (1) The persons who have obtained the citizenship of Nepal  at the time of commencement of this Constitution and who are qualified to obtain  citizenship in accordance with this Part shall be the citizens of Nepal.


(2) The following person who has his or her permanent domicile in Nepal at  the time of commencement of this Constitution shall be the citizen of Nepal by  descent:-
(a)
A person who has obtained the citizenship of Nepal by descent prior  to the commencement of this Constitution;
(b)
A person whose father or mother was a citizen of Nepal at the time of  his or her birth.
(3) A child of a citizen having obtained the citizenship of Nepal by virtue of  birth prior to the commencement of this Constitution shall, upon attaining the age of  majority, acquire the citizenship of Nepal by descent in case the child's father and  mother both are citizens of Nepal.
(4) Every minor who is found within Nepal and the whereabouts of whose  father and mother are not known shall, until the father or the mother of the child is  traced, be a citizen of Nepal by descent.
(5) A person who is born in Nepal to a woman who is a citizen of Nepal and  has resided in Nepal and whose father is not traced shall be provided with the  citizenship of Nepal by descent.
Provided that in case his or her father is held to be a foreign citizen, the  citizenship of such person shall be converted into naturalized citizenship as provided  for in the federal law.


(6) A foreign woman who has a matrimonial relationship with a citizen of
Nepal may, in case she so desires, acquire the naturalized citizenship of Nepal as  provided for in the federal law.


(7) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Article, in the case  of a person born to a woman who is a citizen of Nepal and married to a foreign  citizen, the person may acquire the naturalized citizenship of Nepal in accordance  with the federal law in case he or she has permanently resided in Nepal and has not  acquired the citizenship of a foreign country.


Provided that in case such person's mother and father both are citizens of
Nepal at the time of acquisition of citizenship, such person born in Nepal may acquire  the citizenship of Nepal by descent.


(8) In the cases other than those referred to in this Article, the Government of
Nepal may, in accordance with the federal law, grant the naturalized citizenship of
Nepal.


(9) The Government of Nepal may, in accordance with the federal law, grant  the honorary citizenship of Nepal.


(10) Whenever any territory is acquired by way of incorporation into Nepal, a  person having his or her domicile within such territory shall, subject to the federal  law, become a citizen of Nepal.
12.
Citizenship based on Descent along with Gender Identity: A person who is entitled to  obtain the citizenship of Nepal by descent in accordance with this Constitution may  obtain a certificate of citizenship of Nepal with gender identity by the name of his or  her mother or father.
13.
Acquisition, Reacquisition and Termination of Citizenship: Other matters relating to  the acquisition, reacquisition and termination of citizenship shall be as provided for in  the federal law.
14.
Power to Grant non-resident Nepali Citizenship: The non-residential citizenship of
Nepal may be so granted to a person who has acquired the citizenship of a foreign  country, has resided in a country other than a Member State of the South Asian
Association for Regional Cooperation, and who or whose father or mother,  grandfather or grandmother was previously a citizen of Nepal by decent or birth but

subsequently acquired the citizenship of the foreign country that such person may  enjoy economic, social and cultural rights in accordance with the federal law.
15.
Other Provisions relating to Citizenship of Nepal: Other matters relating to the  maintenance of records setting out the identity of every citizen of Nepal and the  citizenship of Nepal shall be as provided for in the federal law.


Part-3
Fundamental Rights and Duties
16.
Right to Live with Dignity: (1) Every person shall have the right to live with dignity.
(2) No law shall be made providing for the death penalty to anyone.
17.
Right to Freedom: (1) No person shall be deprived of his or her personal liberty except  in accordance with law.
(2) Every citizen shall have the following freedoms: -
(a)
Freedom of opinion and expression;
(b)
Freedom to assemble peaceably and without arms;
(c)
Freedom to form political parties;
(d)
Freedom to form unions and associations;
(e)
Freedom to move and reside in any part of Nepal;
(f)
Freedom to practise any profession, carry on any occupation and establish  and operate any industry, trade and business in any part of Nepal.
Provided that:
(1)
Nothing in sub-clause (a) shall be deemed to prevent the making of an Act  to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may undermine the  sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and independence of Nepal or  the harmonious relations between the Federal Units or the people of  various castes, tribes, religions or communities or incite caste-based  discrimination or untouchability or on any act of disrespect of labour,  defamation, contempt of court, incitement to an offence or on any act  which may be contrary to public decency or morality.
(2)
Nothing in sub-clause (b) shall be deemed to prevent the making of an Act  to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may undermine the  sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and independence of Nepal or  the harmonious relations between the Federal Units or public law and  order.


(3)
Nothing in sub-clause (c) shall be deemed to prevent the making of an Act  to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may undermine the  sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and independence of Nepal,  constitute an espionage against the nation or divulge national secrecy or on  any act of rendering assistance to any foreign State, organization or  representative in a manner to undermine the security of Nepal or on an act  of sedition or on any act which may undermine the harmonious relations  between the Federal Units or on any act of incitement to caste-based or  communal hatred or on any act which may undermine the harmonious  relations between various castes, tribes, religions and communities, or on  any act of acquisition of, or restriction on, membership of any political  party on the basis solely of tribe, language, religion, community or sex  or  on any act of formation of a political party with discrimination between  citizens or on incitement to violent acts or on any act which may be  contrary to public morality.
(4)
Nothing in sub-clause (d) shall be deemed to prevent the making of an Act  to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may undermine the  sovereignty, territorial integrity, nationality and independence of Nepal, or  on any act which may constitute espionage against the nation or on any act  of divulgence of national secrecy or on any act assisting any foreign State,  organization or representative in a manner to undermine the security of
Nepal or on an act of sedition or on any act which may undermine the  harmonious relations between the Federal Units or on any act of  incitement to caste-based or communal hatred or on any act which may  undermine the harmonious relations between various castes, tribes,  religions and communities or on incitement to violent acts or on any act  which may be contrary to public morality.
(5)
Nothing in sub-clause (e) shall be deemed to prevent the making of an Act  to impose reasonable restrictions on any act which may undermine the  interest of the pubic-in-general or which may undermine the harmonious  relations between the Federal Units or the harmonious relations between  the peoples of various castes, tribes, religions or communities or which  may constitute or incite violent acts.


(6)
Nothing in sub-clause (f) shall be deemed to prevent the making of an Act  to prevent any act which may undermine the harmonious relations between  the Federal Units or any act which may be contrary to public health,  decency or morality of pubic-in-general or to confer on the State the  exclusive right to undertake any specific industry, trade or service, or to  prescribe any condition or qualification for carrying on any industry, trade,  occupation, employment or business.
18.
Right to Equality: (1) All citizens shall be equal before law. No one shall be denied  the equal protection of law.
(2) No discrimination shall be made in the application of general laws on  grounds of origin, religion, race, caste, tribe, sex, physical condition, disability,  condition of health, marital status, pregnancy, economic condition, language or  region, ideological conviction or on similar other grounds.
(3) The State shall not discriminate among citizens on grounds of origin,  religion, race, caste, tribe, sex, economic condition, language, region, ideological  conviction or on similar other grounds.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the making of special  provisions by law for the protection, empowerment or development of the citizens  including the socially or culturally backward women, Dalit, indigenous people,  indigenous nationalities (Aadibasi Janajati), Madhesi, Tharu, Muslim, oppressed  class, Pichhada class, minorities, the marginalized, farmers, labours, youths, children,  senior citizens, gender and sexual minorities, persons with disabilities, pregnant  persons, incapacitated or helpless, backward region and indigent Khas Arya.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Part and Part 4, "indigent" means a person who  earns income less than that specified by the federal law.
(4) No discrimination shall be made on the ground of gender with regard to  remuneration and social security for the same work.
(5) All offspring shall have the equal right to the ancestral property without  discrimination on the ground of gender.
19.
Right to Communication: (1) No publication and broadcasting or dissemination or  printing of any news item, editorial, feature article or other reading, audio and audio-

visual material through any means whatsoever including electronic publication,  broadcasting and printing shall be censored.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the making of Acts to impose  reasonable restrictions on any act which may undermine the sovereignty, territorial  integrity, nationality of Nepal or the harmonious relations between the Federal Units  or the harmonious relations between various castes, tribes, religions or communities,  or on any act of sedition, defamation or contempt of court or incitement to an offence,  or on any act which may be contrary to public decency or morality, on any act of  hatred to labour and on any act of incitement to caste-based untouchability as well as  gender discrimination.
(2) No radio, television, online or other form of digital or electronic equipment,  press or other means of communication publishing, broadcasting or printing any news  item, feature, editorial, article, information or other material shall be closed or seized  nor shall registration thereof be cancelled nor shall such material be seized by the  reason of publication, broadcasting or printing of such material through any audio,  audio-visual or electronic equipment or press.
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the  making of an Act to regulate radio, television, online or any other form of digital or  electronic equipment, press or other means of communication.
(3) No means of communication including the press, electronic broadcasting and  telephone shall be interrupted except in accordance with law.
20.
Rights relating to Justice: (1) No person shall be detained in custody without  informing him or her of the ground for his or her arrest.
(2) Any person who is arrested shall have the right to consult a legal  practitioner of his or her choice from the time of such arrest and to be defended by  such legal practitioner. Any consultation made by such person with, and advice given  by, his or her legal practitioner shall be confidential.
Provided this clause shall not apply to a citizen of an enemy State.
Explanation: For the purpose of this clause, "legal practitioner" means any  person who is authorized by law to represent any person in any court.


(3) Any person who is arrested shall be produced before the adjudicating  authority within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest, excluding the time  necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to such authority; and no such  person shall be detained in custody except on the order of such authority.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a person held in preventive detention  and to a citizen of an enemy State.
(4) No person shall be liable for punishment for an act which was not  punishable by the law in force when the act was committed nor shall any person be  subjected to a punishment greater than that prescribed by the law in force at the time  of the commission of the offence.
(5) Every person accused of an offence shall be presumed innocent until proved  guilty of the offence.
(6) No person shall be tried and punished for the same offence in a court of law  more than once.
(7) No person accused of an offence shall be compelled to testify against himself  or herself.
(8) Every person shall have the right to be informed of any proceedings taken  against him or her.
(9) Every person shall have the right to a fair trial by an independent, impartial  and competent court or judicial body.
(10) Any indigent party shall have the right to free legal aid in accordance with  law.
21.
Right of Victim of Crime: (1) A victim of crime shall have the right to get information  about the investigation and proceedings of a case in which he or she is the victim.
(2) A victim of crime shall have the right to justice along with social  rehabilitation and compensation in accordance with law.
22.
Right against Torture: (1) No person who is arrested or detained shall be subjected to  physical or mental torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.


(2) Any act referred to in clause (1) shall be punishable by law, and any person  who is a victim of such treatment shall have the right to obtain compensation in  accordance with law.
23.
Right against Preventive Detention: (1) No person shall be held under preventive  detention unless there is a sufficient ground of the existence of an immediate threat to  the sovereignty, territorial integrity or public law and order of Nepal.
(2) Information about the situation of a person who is held under preventive  detention pursuant to clause (1) shall be given immediately to his or her family  members or relatives.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to a citizen of an enemy State.
(3) In case the authority having power to hold a person under preventive  detention holds any person under preventive detention contrary to law or in bad faith,  such person shall have the right to obtain compensation in accordance with law.
24.
Right against Untouchability and Discrimination: (1) No person shall be subjected to  any form of untouchability or discrimination in any private and public places on  grounds of his or her origin, caste, tribe, community, profession, occupation or  physical condition.
(2) In producing or distributing any goods, services or facilities, no person  belonging to any particular caste or tribe shall be prevented from purchasing or  acquiring such goods, services or facilities nor shall such goods, services or facilities  be sold, distributed or provided only to the persons belonging to any particular caste  or tribe.
(3) No act purporting to demonstrate any person or community as superior or  inferior on grounds of origin, caste, tribe or physical condition or justifying social  discrimination on grounds of caste, tribe or untouchability or propagating ideology  based on untouchability and caste based superiority or hatred or encouraging caste- based discrimination in any manner whatsoever shall be allowed.
(4) No discrimination in any form shall be allowed at a workplace with or  without making untouchability on the ground of caste.
(5) All types of acts of untouchability and discrimination committed in  contravention of this Article shall be punishable by law as a severe social offence, and

the victim of such act shall have the right to obtain compensation in accordance with  law.
25.
Right relating to Property: (1) Every citizen shall, subject to law, have the right to  acquire, own, sell, dispose of, acquire business profits from, and otherwise deal with,  property.
Provided that the State may levy tax on property of a person, and tax on income  of a person in accordance with the concept of progressive taxation.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "property" means any form of  property including movable and immovable property and the word includes  intellectual property right as well.
(2) The State shall not, except for public interest, requisition, acquire, or  otherwise create any encumbrance on, property of a person.
Provided that this clause shall not apply to any property acquired by any person  illicitly.
(3) The basis of compensation to be provided and procedures to be followed in  the requisition by the State of property of any person for public interest pursuant to  clause (2) shall be as provided for in the Act.
(4) The provisions of clauses (2) and (3) shall not prevent the State from making  land reforms, management and regulation in accordance with law for the purposes of  enhancement  of  product  and  productivity  of  land,  modernization  and  commercialization of agriculture, environment protection and planned housing and  urban development.
(5) In case the State has requisitioned property of any person for public interest  pursuant to clause (3), nothing shall prevent the State from using such property for  any other public interest instead of such public interest.
26.
Right to Freedom of Religion: (1) Every person who has faith in religion shall have  the freedom to profess, practice and protect his or her religion in accordance with his  or her conviction.


(2) Every religious denomination shall have the right to operate and protect its  religious sites and religious Guthi (trusts).


Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the regulation, by making law,  of the operation and protection of religious sites and religious trusts and management  of trust properties and land.
(3) No person shall, in the exercise of the right conferred by this Article, do, or  cause to be done, any act which may be contrary to public health, decency and  morality or breach of public peace, or convert another person from one religion to  another or any act or conduct that may jeopardize other's religion and such act shall be  punishable by law.
27.
Right to Information: Every citizen shall have the right to demand and receive  information on any matter of his or her interest or of public interest.


Provided that no one shall be compelled to provide information on any matter  which must be maintained confidential in accordance with law.
28.
Right to Privacy: The privacy of any person, his or her residence, property, document,  data, correspondence and matters relating to his or her character shall, except in  accordance with law, be inviolable.
29.
Right against Exploitation: (1) Every person shall have the right against exploitation.
(2) No person shall be exploited in any manner on the grounds of religion,  custom, tradition, usage, practice or on any other grounds.
(3) No one shall be subjected to trafficking nor shall one be held in slavery or  servitude.
(4) No one shall be forced to work against his or her will.
Provided that nothing shall be deemed to prevent the making of law by the State  requiring citizens to perform compulsory service for public purposes.
(5) An act contrary to clauses (3) and (4) shall be punishable by law and the  victim shall have the right to obtain compensation from the perpetrator in accordance  with law.
30.
Right to Clean Environment: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to live in a clean  and healthy environment.
(2) The victim shall have the right to obtain compensation, in accordance with  law, for any damage caused by environmental pollution or degradation.


(3) This Article shall not be deemed to prevent the making of necessary legal  provisions for a proper balance between environment and development in  development works of the nation.
31.
Right relating to Education: (1) Every citizen shall have the right of access to basic  education.


(2) Every citizen shall have the right to get compulsory and free education up  to the basic level and free education up to the secondary level from the State.


(3) The citizens with disabilities and the indigent citizens shall have the right  to get free higher education in accordance with law.


(4) The visually impaired citizens shall have the right to get free education  through brail script and the citizens with hearing or speaking impairment, to get free  education through sign language, in accordance with law.
(5) Every Nepali community residing in Nepal shall have the right to get  education in its own mother tongue and, for that purpose, to open and operate schools  and educational institutes, in accordance with law.
32.
Right to Language and Culture: (1) Every person and community shall have the right  to use their own languages.


(2) Every person and community shall have the right to participate in the  cultural life of his/her/its community.
(3) Every Nepali community residing in Nepal shall have the right to preserve  and promote its language, script, culture, cultural civilization and heritage.
33.
Right to Employment: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to employment. The terms  and conditions of employment, and unemployment benefit shall be as provided for in  the federal law.
(2) Every citizen shall have the right to choose employment.
34.
Right to Labour: (1) Every labourer shall have the right to fair labour practice.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "labourer" means a labourer or  worker who does physical or intellectual work for an employer in consideration for  remuneration.


(2) Every labourer shall have the right to appropriate remuneration, facilities and  contributory social security.
(3) Every labourer shall have the right to form and join trade unions and to  engage in collective bargaining, in accordance with law.
35.
Right relating to Health: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to free basic health  services from the State, and no one shall be deprived of emergency health services.
(2) Every person shall have the right to get information about his or her medical  treatment.
(3) Every citizen shall have equal access to health services.
(4) Every citizen shall have the right of access to clean drinking water and  sanitation.
36.
Right relating to Food: (1) Every citizen shall have the right relating to food.
(2) Every citizen shall have the right to be safe from the state of being in  danger of life from the scarcity of food.
(3) Every citizen shall have the right to food sovereignty in accordance with  law.
37.
Right to Housing: (1) Every citizen shall have the right to an appropriate housing.
(2) No citizen shall be evicted from the residence owned by him or her nor  shall his or her residence be infringed except in accordance with law.
38.
Rights of Women: (1) Every woman shall have equal lineage right without gender- based discrimination.


(2) Every woman shall have the right to safe motherhood and reproductive  health.
(3) No woman shall be subjected to physical, mental, sexual, psychological or  other form of violence or exploitation on grounds of religion, social, cultural tradition,  practice or on any other grounds. Such act shall be punishable by law, and the victim  shall have the right to obtain compensation in accordance with law.


(4) Women shall have the right to participate in all bodies of the State on the  basis of the principle of proportional inclusion.


(5) Women shall have the right to obtain special opportunity in education,  health, employment and social security, on the basis of positive discrimination.
(6) The husband and wife shall have the equal right to property and family  affairs.
39.
Rights of Child: (1) Every child shall have the right to name and birth registration  along with his or her identity.
(2) Every child shall have the right to education, health, maintenance, proper  care, sports, entertainment and overall personality development from the families and  the State.
(3) Every child shall have the right to elementary child development and child  participation.
(4) No child shall be engaged in any factory, mine or similar other hazardous  work.
5) No child shall be subjected to child marriage, transported illegally and  kidnapped or taken hostage.
(6) No child shall be recruited or used in army, police or any armed group, or be  subjected, in the name of cultural or religious traditions, to abuse, exclusion or physical,  mental, sexual or other form of exploitation or improper use by any means or in any  manner.
(7) No child shall be subjected to physical, mental or any other form of torture  in home, school or other place and condition whatsoever.
(8) Every child shall have the right to child-friendly justice.
(9) The child who is helpless, orphan, with disabilities, conflict victim, displaced  or vulnerable shall have the right to special protection and facilities from the State.
(10) Any act contrary to in clauses (4), (5), (6) and (7) shall be punishable by  law, and a child who is the victim of such act shall have the right to obtain  compensation from the perpetrator, in accordance with law.
40.
Rights of Dalit: (1) The Dalit shall have the right to participate in all bodies of the
State on the basis of the principle of proportional inclusion. Special provision shall be

made by law for empowerment, representation and participation of the Dalit  community in public services as well as other sectors of employment.
(2) Provision of free education with scholarship, from primary to higher  education, shall be made by law for the Dalit students. Special provision shall be  made by law for the Dalit in technical and vocational education.
(3) Special provision shall be made by law in order to provide health and  social security to the Dalit community.
(4) The Dalit community shall have the right to use, protect and develop their  traditional occupation, knowledge, skill and technology. The State shall accord  priority to the Dalit community in modern business related with their traditional  occupation and provide skills and resources required therefor.
(5) The State shall provide land to the landless Dalit for one time in  accordance with law.
(6) The State shall, in accordance with law, make provision of settlement for  the Dalit who do not have housing.
(7) The facilities conferred by this Article to the Dalit community shall be  distributed in a just manner so that the Dalit women, men and Dalit in all  communities may obtain such facilities proportionately.
41.
Rights of Senior Citizens: The senior citizens shall have the right to special protection  and social security from the State.
42.
Right to Social Justice: (1) The economically, socially or educationally backward  women, Dalit, indigenous nationalities (Aadibasi Janajati), Madhesi, Tharu,
Muslims, backward classes, minorities, marginalized communities, persons with  disabilities, gender and sexual minorities, farmers, labourers, oppressed or  citizens of backward regions and indigent Khas Arya shall have the right to  participate in the bodies of the State on the basis of principle of proportional  inclusion.


(2) The indigent citizens and citizens of the communities on the verge of  extinction shall have the right to get special opportunities and benefits in education,

 Amended by the First Amendment.

health, housing, employment, food and social security for their protection, upliftment,  empowerment and development.


(3) The citizens with disabilities shall have the right to live with dignity and  honour, with the identity of their diversity, and have equal access to public services  and facilities.


(4) Every farmer shall, in accordance with law, have the right to have access to  land for agro activities, select and protect local seeds and agro species which have  been used and pursued traditionally.


(5) The families of the martyrs who have sacrificed their life, and of the  disappeared persons and those who became disabled and injured in all people's  movements, armed conflicts and revolutions that have been carried out for progressive  democratic changes in Nepal, democracy fighters, conflict victims and displaced ones,  persons with disabilities, the injured and victims shall have the right to get a  prioritized opportunity, with justice and due respect, in education, health,  employment, housing and social security, in accordance with law.
43.
Right to Social Security: The indigent citizens, incapacitated and helpless citizens,  helpless single women, citizens with disabilities, children, citizens who cannot take care  themselves and citizens belonging to the tribes on the verge of extinction shall have  the right to social security, in accordance with law.
44.
Rights of Consumer: (1) Every consumer shall have the right to obtain quality goods  and services.
(2) A person who has suffered damage from any substandard goods or services  shall have the right to obtain compensation in accordance with law.
45.
Right against Exile: No citizen shall be exiled.
46.
Right to Constitutional Remedies: There shall be a right to obtain constitutional  remedies in the manner set forth in Article 133 or 144 for the enforcement of the  rights conferred by this Part.
47.
Implementation of Fundamental Rights: The State shall, as required, make legal  provisions for the implementation of the rights conferred by this Part, within three  years of the commencement of this Constitution.
48.
Duties of Citizens: Every citizen shall have the following duties:-


(a)
To safeguard the nationality, sovereignty and integrity of Nepal, while  being loyal to the nation;
(b)
To abide by the Constitution and law;
(c)
To render compulsory service as and when the State so requires;
(d)
To protect and preserve public property.


Part-4
Directive Principles, Policies and Obligations of the State
49.
To be as Guidelines: (1) The directive principles, policies and obligations set forth in  this Part shall be guidelines for governance of the State.
(2) The State shall mobilize, or cause to be mobilized, means and resources, as  required, to implement the principles, policies and obligations set forth in this Part.
50.
Directive Principles: (1) The political objective of the State shall be to establish a  public welfare system of governance, by establishing a just system in all aspects of  national life through the rule of law, values and norms of fundamental rights and  human rights, gender equality, proportional inclusion, participation and social justice,  while at the same time protecting the life, property, equality and liberties of the  people, in keeping with the vitality of freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity and  independence of Nepal; and to consolidate the federal democratic republican system  of governance in order to ensure an atmosphere conducive to the enjoyment of fruits  of democracy, while at the same time maintaining the relations between the Federal
Units on the basis of cooperative federalism and incorporating the principle of  proportional participation in the system of governance on the basis of local autonomy  and decentralization.
(2) The social and cultural objective of the State shall be to build a civilized  and egalitarian society by eliminating all forms of discrimination, exploitation and  injustice based on the grounds of religion, culture, tradition, usage, custom, practice or  on any other similar grounds; to develop social, cultural values founded on national  pride, democracy, pro-people, respect of labour, entrepreneurship, discipline, dignity  and harmony; and to consolidate the national unity by maintaining social cohesion,  solidarity and harmony, while recognizing cultural diversity.
(3) The economic objective of the State shall be to attain a sustainable  economic development, while achieving rapid economic growth, by way of maximum  mobilization of the available means and resources through participation and  development of public, private and cooperatives; and to develop a socialism-oriented  independent and prosperous economy while making the national economy  independent, self-reliant and progressive in order to build an exploitation-free society

by abolishing economic inequality through equitable distribution of the achievements  made.
(4) The State shall direct its international relations towards enhancing the  dignity of the nation in the world community by maintaining international relations on  the basis of sovereign equality, while safeguarding the freedom, sovereignty, territorial  integrity and independence and national interest of Nepal.
51.
Policies of the State: The State shall pursue the following policies:-
(a) Policies relating to National Unity and National Security:
(1)
To maintain national unity intact, while protecting the freedom,  sovereignty, territorial integrity and independence of Nepal;
(2)
To promote national unity while developing mutual cooperative  relations among the Federal Units by maintaining mutual cohesion,  harmony and solidarity among various castes, tribes, religions,  languages, cultures and communities;
(3)
To maintain law and order by developing national security system;
(4)
To guarantee overall human security system;
(5)
To make all security organs, including the Nepal Army, Nepal Police  and Armed Police Force Nepal, competent, strong, professional,  inclusive and accountable to people, on the basis of national security  policies;
(6)
To make and keep citizens ready and competent to serve the nation as  and when the nation requires;
(7)
To make proper use, in nations' interest, of knowledge, skills and  experiences of former public employees including former employees,  military and police.
(b) Policies relating to Political and Governance System of State:
(1)
To guarantee the best interests and prosperity of people through  economic, social and cultural transformations, while safeguarding,  consolidating and developing political achievements;
(2)
To maintain rule of law by protecting and promoting human rights;


(3)
To implement international treaties, agreements to which Nepal is a  party;
(4)
To guarantee good governance by ensuring equal and easy access of  people to services and facilities delivered by the State, while making  public administration fair, competent, impartial, transparent, free from  corruption, accountable and participatory;
(5)
To make necessary provisions to make mass media fair, healthy,  impartial, decent, responsible and professional;
(6)
To develop and expand harmonious and cooperative relations between  the Federal Units by way of sharing of responsibilities, resources and  administration between them.
(c) Policies relating to Social and Cultural Transformation:
(1)
To build a society founded on cordial social relations by developing a  healthy and civilized culture;
(2)
To carry out studies, research works, excavation and dissemination for  the  protection,  promotion  and  development  of  historical,  archaeological and cultural heritages;
(3)
To make community development through enhancement of local public  participation, by promoting and mobilizing the creativity of local  communities in social, cultural and service-oriented works;
(4)
To focus on development of arts, literature and music which form part  of national heritages;
(5)
To eliminate all forms of discrimination, inequality, exploitation and  injustice in the name of religion, custom, usage, practice and tradition  existing in society;
(6)
To protect and develop languages, scripts, culture, literature, arts,  motion pictures and heritages of various castes, tribes, and  communities on the basis of equality and co-existence, while  maintaining the cultural diversity of the country;
(7)
To pursue a multi-lingual policy.


(d) Policies relating to Economy, Industry and Commerce:
(1)
To strengthen national economy through participation and independent  development of the public, private and cooperative sectors;
(2)
To achieve economic prosperity by way of optimum mobilization of  the available means and resources, while focusing on the role of  private sector in economy;
(3)
To promote the cooperative sector and mobilize it in national  development to the maximum extent;
(4)
To encourage and mobilize the economic sector in the overall national  development, while providing for regulation to maintain fairness,  accountability and competition in all of its activities;
(5)
To make equitable distribution of the available means and resources  and benefits of economic development;
(6)
To diversify and expand markets for goods and services, while  promoting exports through development and expansion of industries  upon identifying areas of comparative advantage;
(7)
To protect interests of consumers by maintaining trade fairness and  discipline by making national economy competitive, while eliminating  activities such as black marketing, monopoly, creating artificial  scarcity and restricting competition;
(8)
To protect and promote national industries and resources and accord  priority to domestic investment based on Nepali labour, skills and raw  materials for development of national economy;
(9)
To accord priority to domestic investment for development of national  economy;
(10)
To encourage foreign capital and technological investment in areas of  import substitution and export promotion, in consonance with national  interest, and encourage and mobilize such investment in development  of infrastructure;


(11)
To make the receiving of foreign assistance transparent, while making  the national needs and priorities as the bases for obtaining foreign  assistance, and incorporating amounts received in form of foreign  assistance in the national budget,
(12)
To utilize knowledge, skill, technology and capital of the non-resident
Nepali in the national development;
(13)
To make economic development dynamic by establishing coordination  among Provinces and Provinces and the Federation in relation to  industrial corridors, special economic zones, national projects and  projects involving foreign investment.
(e) Policies relating to Agriculture and Land Reforms:
(1)
To introduce scientific land reforms having regard to the interests of  the farmers, while ending the dual ownership existing in the land;
(2)
To enhance product and productivity by carrying out land pooling,  while discouraging absentee land ownership;
(3)
To  carry  out  land  management  and  commercialization,  industrialization, diversification and modernization of agriculture by  pursuing land-use policies to enhance agriculture product and  productivity, while protecting and promoting the rights and interests of  the farmers;
(4)
To make proper use of land, while regulating and managing it on the  basis of, inter alia, productivity, nature of land and ecological balance;
(5)
To make provisions for appropriate prices of agricultural inputs and  agricultural products and for market access.
(f)
Policies relating to Development:
(1)
To formulate sustainable socio-economic development strategies and  programs under the regional development plan for inclusive economic  development with regional balance, and implement them in a  coordinative manner;


(2)
To develop balanced, environment friendly, quality standard and  sustainable physical infrastructures, while according priority to the  regions lagging behind from development perspective;
(3)
To enhance local public participation in the process of development  works;
(4)
To enhance investment in scientific study, research works and in  invention, progress and development of science and technology, and  protect scientists, technologists, intellectual and eminent talents;
(5)
To ensure easy and simple access of public-in-general to information  technology by developing and expanding information technology in  tune with national needs, and make optimum utilization of information  technology in the national development;
(6)
To make provisions enabling public-in-public-in-general to enjoy fruits  of development in just manner, while according priority to the indigent  citizens in the distribution of such fruits;
(7)
To develop an integrated national identity management information  system and manage all types of information and data of the citizens in  an integrated manner, and link such system with the services and  facilities provided by the State and with national development plans;
(8)
To update demographic statistics and link it with national development  plans.
(g) Policies relating to Protection, Promotion and Use of Natural Resources:
(1)
To protect, promote, and make environmental friendly and sustainable  use of, natural resources available in the country, in consonance with  national interest and by adopting the concept of inter-generational  equity, and make equitable distribution of benefits, according priority  and preferential right to the local communities;
(2)
To achieve multi-purpose development of water resources having  accorded priority to national investment based on public participation;


(3)
To ensure reliable supply of energy in an affordable, and easy manner,  and make proper use of energy, for the fulfilment of the basic needs of  citizens, by generating and developing renewable energy;
(4)
To develop sustainable and reliable irrigation by making control of  water-induced disasters, and river management;
(5)
To conserve, promote, and make sustainable use of, forests, wildlife,  birds, vegetation and bio-diversity, by mitigating possible risks to  environment from industrial and physical development, while raising  awareness of public-in-general about environment cleanliness;
(6)
To maintain forest area in territory required for ecological balance;
(7)
To adopt appropriate measures to abolish or mitigate existing or  possible adverse environmental impacts on the nature, environment or  biological diversity;
(8)
To pursue principles of environmentally sustainable development such  as the principles of polluter pay, of precaution in environmental  protection and of prior informed consent;
(9)
To make provisions of advance warning, preparedness, rescue, relief  and rehabilitation in order to mitigate risks from natural disasters.
(h)
Policies relating to Basic Needs of Citizens:
(1)
To prepare human resources that are competent, competitive, ethical,  and devoted to national interests, while making education scientific,  technical, vocational, skill-oriented, employment and people-oriented;
(2)
To promote investment of the State in education sector and to make  private sector investment in education service-oriented by regulation  and management;
(3)
To make higher education easy, qualitative and accessible, and free  gradually;
(4)
To establish and promote community information centres and libraries  for personality development of citizens;


(5)
To keep on increasing investment necessary in public health sector by  the State in order to make the citizens healthy;
(6)
To ensure easy, convenient and equal access of all to quality health  services;
(7)
To protect and promote health systems including Ayurveda, as a  traditional medical system of Nepal, natural therapy and homeopathy  system;
(8)
To make private sector investment in the health sector service-oriented  by regulating and managing such investment, while enhancing the
State's investment in this sector;
(9)
To focus on health research and keep on increasing the number of  health institutions and health workers in order to make health services  widely available and qualitative;
(10)
To increase average life expectancy by reducing maternal and infant  mortality rates, while encouraging family planning for population  management on the basis of Nepal's capacity and need;
(11)
To manage unplanned settlement and develop planned and systematic  settlement;
(12)
To provide for sustainable production, supplies, storage, security, and  easy and effective distribution of foods by encouraging food  production in tune with climate and soil, in consonance with the  concept of food sovereignty, while enhancing investment in the  agriculture sector;
(13)
To ensure planned supply system by according special priority to the  remote and backward regions, while ensuring equal access of all  citizens to basic goods and services;
(14)
To enhance investment in the transportation sector, while ensuring  simple, easy and equal access of the citizens to transportation facilities,  and to make the transportation sector safe, systematic and friendly to  persons with disabilities by encouraging public transportation and

regulating private transportation, while according priority to the  environment friendly technologies;
(15)
To arrange for access to medical treatment while ensuring citizen's  health insurance.
(i)
Policies relating to Labour and Employment:
(1)
To make competent and professional the labour force that has remained  as the main socio-economic strength of the country and enhance  employment within the country, while ensuring a condition enabling all  to work;
(2)
To guarantee social security, while ensuring the basic rights of all  labours, in consonance with the concept of decent labour;
(3)
To abolish all forms of labour exploitation including child labour;
(4)
To encourage participation of labourer in management, while  maintaining cordial relations between the labourer and entrepreneurs;
(5)
To regulate and manage the foreign employment sector in order to  make it free from exploitation, safe and systematic and to guarantee  employment and rights of the labourer;
(6)
To encourage mobilizing the capital, skills, technology and experience  gained from foreign employment in productive sectors in the country.

(j)
Policies relating to Social Justice and Inclusion:
(1)
To keep on making appropriate arrangements for the livelihoods of  helpless single women, while according priority to them in  employment on the basis of skills, competency and qualification;
(2)
To make self-reliant women who are at risks, subjected to social and  family exclusion and victims of violence by their rehabilitation,  protection and empowerment;
(3)
To ensure enjoyment of requisite services and facilities at the  reproductive stage;
(4)
To evaluate economically the work and contribution such as  maintenance of children and care of families;


(5)
To take into consideration primarily of the best interests of the child;
(6)
To identify the freed bonded labours, Kamlari, Harawa, Charawa,  tillers, landless, squatters and rehabilitate them by providing housing,  housing plot for residence and cultivable land or employment for their  livelihoods;
(7)
To create an atmosphere conducive to the full enjoyment of the  political, economic, social and cultural rights, while enhancing the  participation of youths in national development, to make their  personality development, while providing special opportunity in areas  including education, health and employment for the empowerment and  development of the youths and provide them with appropriate  opportunities for the overall development of the State;
(8)
To make the indigenous nationalities (Aadibasi Janajati) participate in  decisions concerning that community by making special provisions for  opportunities and benefits in order to ensure the right of these  nationalities to live with dignity, along with their identity, and protect  and promote traditional knowledge, skill, culture, social tradition and  experience of the indigenous nationalities and local communities;
(9)
To make special provisions for opportunities and benefits to minority  communities to enjoy social and cultural rights, having maintained  their identity;
(10)
To make special provisions for equal distribution of economic, social  and cultural opportunities and benefits to the Madhesi community,
Muslims and backward class, and for opportunities and benefits to the  indigent citizens within such communities for their protection,  upliftment, empowerment and development;
(11)
To make special provisions for opportunities and benefits for the  protection, upliftment, empowerment and development of the citizens  of the oppressed and backward regions and for the fulfilment of their  basic needs;
(12)
To accord priority to the indigent persons within all sexes, regions and  communities while providing social security and social justice;


(13)
To make planned investment in sports and sport-persons in order to  prepare healthy, competent and disciplined citizens, and to develop  sports as a means of consolidating national unity and enhancing  national prestige at the international level;
(14)
To adopt a single door system for the establishment, approval, operation,  regulation and management of community-based and national or  international non-governmental organizations and to involve such  organizations only in the sectors of national need and priority, while  making investment and role of such organizations transparent and  accountable.
(k)
Policies relating to Justice and Penal System:
(1)
To make administration of justice speedy, efficient, widely available,  cost-effective, impartial, effective, and accountable to people;
(2)
To pursue alternative means such as mediation and arbitration for the  settlement of disputes of ordinary nature;
(3)
To adopt effective measures for control of corruption and irregularities  in all sectors including political, administrative, judicial and social  sectors.
(l)
Policies relating to Tourism: To develop eco-friendly tourism industries as an  important base of national economy by way of identification, protection,  promotion and publicity of the   historical, cultural, religious, archaeological  and natural heritages of Nepal, to make environment and policy required for  the development of tourism culture, and to accord priority to local people in  the distribution of benefits of tourism industries.
(m)
Policies relating to International Relations:
(1)
To conduct independent  foreign policy based on the Charter of the
United Nations, non-alignment, principles of Panchsheel, international  law and the norms of world peace, taking into consideration of the  overall interest of  the nation, while remaining active in safeguarding  the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and national interest  of Nepal;


(2)
To review treaties concluded in the past, and conclude treaties,  agreements based on equality and mutual interest.
52.
Obligations of the State: It shall be the obligation of the State to make Nepal a  prosperous and affluent country by protecting and promoting fundamental rights and  human rights, pursuing directive principles of the State and gradually implementing  policies of the State, while keeping intact the freedom, sovereignty, territorial integrity  and independence of Nepal.
53.
To Submit Report: The Government of Nepal shall submit to the President an annual  report containing the steps taken and achievements made in the implementation of the  directive principles, policies and obligations of the State set forth in this Part, and the
President shall cause such report to be laid through the Prime Minister before the
Federal Parliament.
54.
Provisions relating to Monitoring: There shall be a committee, in accordance with  law, in the Federal Parliament in order to monitor and evaluate whether or not the  directive principles, policies and obligations of the State set forth in this Part have  been implemented progressively.
55.
Questions not to be raised in Court: No question shall be raised in any court as to  whether or not any matter contained in this Part has been implemented.


Part-5
Structure of State and Distribution of State Power
56.
Structure of State: (1) The main structure of the Federal Democratic Republic of
Nepal shall be of three levels, namely the Federation, the Province and the Local
Level.
(2) The Federation, Provinces and Local Levels shall exercise the State power  of Nepal in accordance with this Constitution and law.
(3) There shall be Provinces consisting of the Districts referred to in Schedule-
4 existing in Nepal at the time of commencement of this Constitution.
(4) There shall be Rural Municipality, Municipality and District Assembly  under the Local Level. The number of Wards in a Rural Municipality and
Municipality shall be as provided for in the federal law.
(5) Any Special, Protected or Autonomous Region may be set up by the  federal law for social, cultural protection or economic development.
(6) The Federation, Provinces and Local Levels shall protect Nepal's freedom,  sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence, national interest, overall development,  multi-party, competitive, democratic, republican, federal system of governance,  human rights and fundamental rights, rule of law, separation of powers and check and  balance, egalitarian society based on pluralism and equality, inclusive representation  and identity.
57.
Distribution of State Power: (1) The powers of the Federation shall be vested on the  matters enumerated in Schedule-5 and such powers shall be exercised in accordance  with this Constitution and the federal law.
(2) The powers of a Province shall be vested on the matters enumerated in
Schedule-6 and such powers shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution  and the provincial law.
(3) The concurrent powers of the Federation and a Province shall be vested on  the matters enumerated in Schedule-7 and such powers shall be exercised in  accordance with this Constitution, federal law and provincial law.


(4) The powers of the Local Level shall be vested on the matters enumerated  in Schedule-8 and such powers shall be exercised in accordance with this Constitution  and law made by the Rural Municipal Assembly or Municipal Assembly, as the case  may be.
(5) The concurrent powers of the Federation, Provinces and Local Levels shall  be vested on the matters enumerated in Schedule-9 and such powers shall be  exercised in accordance with this Constitution, federal law, provincial law and law  made by the Rural Municipal Assembly or Municipal Assembly, as the case may be.
(6) Any law to be made by a Provincial Assembly, Rural Municipal Assembly  or Municipal Assembly pursuant to clause (3) or (5) shall be so made as not to be  inconsistent with the federal law; and any law made by the Provincial Assembly,
Rural Municipal Assembly or Municipal Assembly which is inconsistent with the  federal law shall be invalid to the extent of such inconsistency.
(7) Any law to be made by a Rural Municipal Assembly or Municipal
Assembly, as the case may be, pursuant to clause (5) shall be so made as not to be  inconsistent with a provincial law; and any law made by the Rural Municipal
Assembly or Municipal Assembly which is inconsistent with a provincial law shall be  invalid to the extent of such inconsistency.
58.
Residuary Powers: The Federation shall have power on any matter not enumerated in  the list of powers of the Federation, Province and Local Level or Concurrent Lists or  on any matter which is not so specified in this Constitution as to be exercised by any  level.
59.
Exercise of Financial Powers: (1) The Federation, Province and Local Level shall  make laws, make annual budget, decisions, formulate and implement policies and  plans on any matters related to financial powers within their respective competence.
(2) The Federation may so make necessary policies, standards and laws on any  of the matters enumerated in the Concurrent List and other areas of financial powers  as to be applicable also to the Provinces.
(3) The Federation, Province and Local Level shall make budget of their  respective levels, and the time for submission of budget by Province and Local Level  shall be as provided for in the federal law.


(4) The Federation, Province and Local Level shall provide for equitable  distribution of benefits derived from the use of natural resources or development.
Certain portions of such benefits shall be distributed, in accordance with law, in the  form of royalty, services or goods to the project affected regions and local  communities.
(5) In case, in utilising natural resources, the local community desires to make  investment therein, the Federation, Province and Local Level shall accord priority to  such investment in such portion as provided by law on the basis of the nature and size  of such investment.
(6) The Government of Nepal shall have power to obtain foreign assistance  and borrow loans. Such assistance or loans shall be so obtained or borrowed as to  have macro-economic stability of the country.
(7) Provisions relating to the management of budget deficits and other fiscal  discipline of the Federation, Province and Local Level shall be as provided for in the  federal law.
60.
Distribution of Sources of Revenue: (1) The Federation, Province and Local Level  may impose taxes on matters falling within their respective competence and collect  revenue from these sources.
Provided that provisions relating to the imposition of taxes and collection of  revenue on matters enumerated in the Concurrent List and on matters that are not  contained in the List of any level shall be as determined by the Government of Nepal.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make provisions for the equitable  distribution of the collected revenue to the Federation, Province and Local Level.
(3) The amount of fiscal transfer receivable by Province and Local Level shall  be as recommended by the National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission.
(4) The Government of Nepal shall, on the basis of the need of expenditure  and revenue capacity, distribute fiscal equalization grants to Province and Local
Level.
(5) Each Province shall, in accordance with the provincial law, distribute fiscal  equalization grants out of the grants received from the Government of Nepal and

revenues collected from its own sources, on the basis of the need of expenditure and  revenue capacity of its subordinate Local Level.
(6) Provisions relating to distribution of conditional grants, complementary  grants or special grants for other purposes to be provided by the Government of Nepal  from the Federal Consolidated Fund shall be as provided for in the federal law.
(7) While distributing revenues between the Federal, Provincial and Local
Levels, it shall be made in a balanced and transparent manner.
(8) In making a federal Act on the distribution of revenues, regard shall be had  to the matters of national policies; national requirements; autonomy of the Province  and Local Levels; services to be rendered by the Province and Local Level to the  people and financial powers granted to them; capacity to collect revenues; potentiality  and use of revenues; assistance to be made in development and construction;  reduction of regional imbalances; poverty and inequality; end of deprivation; and  assistance to be made in the performance of contingent works and fulfilment of  temporary needs.


Part-6
President and Vice-President
61.
President: (1) There shall be a President of Nepal.
(2) The President shall be the Head of State of Nepal. He or she shall perform  his or her functions in accordance with this Constitution and federal law.
(3) The President shall promote national unity of Nepal.
(4) The main duty of the President shall be to abide by and protect the
Constitution.
62.
Election of President: (1) The President shall be elected by an electoral college  consisting of the members of the Federal Parliament and members of the Provincial
Assemblies. The voting weightage of the members of the Federal Parliament and of  the Provincial Assemblies shall vary as provided for in the federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), nothing shall be deemed  to bar the formation of an electoral college for the purpose of election to the President  by the sole reason that election to Provincial Assembly has not been held in any
Province.
(3) A person who secures a majority of the then existing total votes of the
Electoral College referred to in clause (1) shall be elected as the President.
(4) In case none of the candidates secures a majority pursuant to clause (3),  there shall be the voting between the two candidates who have secured the highest  number of votes, and a candidate who secures more than fifty percent of the total  votes in such voting shall be elected as the President.
(5) In case none of the candidates secures more than fifty percent of the total  votes even in the voting under clause (4), re-voting shall be held. A candidate who  secures a majority of the total valid votes cast in such voting shall be elected as the
President.
(6) In case a person who holds a political office to be fulfilled by way of  election, nomination or appointment is elected as the President under this Article, such  office shall, ipso facto, fall vacant.


(7) Election to the President and other matters related thereto shall be as  provided for in the federal law.
63.
Term of Office of President: (1) The term of office of the President shall be five years  from the date on which he or she is elected.
(2) The President whose term of office under clause (1) has expired shall  continue to discharge the functions under this Constitution until another elected
President assumes his or her office.
64.
Qualification for President: (1) A person who has the following qualifications shall be  eligible to become the President:-
(a)   One who is eligible to become a member of the Federal Parliament;
(b)   On who has completed the age of at least forty-five years; and
(c)  One who is not disqualified by any law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), a person who has  already been elected twice as the President shall not be eligible to be a candidate in  the election to the President.
65.
Vacation of Office of President: The office of the President shall fall vacant in any of the  following circumstances:
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Vice-President;
(b)
In case the motion of impeachment against him or her is adopted under
Article 101;
(c)
In case his or her term of the office expires;
(d)
In case he or she dies.
66.
Functions, Duties and Powers of President: (1) The President shall exercise such  powers and perform such duties as conferred on him or her in accordance with this
Constitution or the federal law.
(2) In exercising the powers or duties under clause (1), the President shall  perform all other functions to be performed by him or her on recommendation and  with the consent of the Council of Ministers than those functions specifically provided  to be performed on recommendation of any institution or official under this


Constitution or federal law. Such recommendation and consent shall be submitted  through the Prime Minister.
(3) Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the President under  clause (2) and other instrument of authorization pertaining thereto shall be  authenticated as provided for in the federal law.
67.
Vice-President: (1) There shall be a Vice-president of Nepal.
(2) The functions to be performed by the President shall be performed by the
Vice-president during the absence of the President.
(3) In case a person who holds a political office to be fulfilled by way of  election, nomination or appointment is elected as the Vice-president, such office shall,  ipso facto, fall vacant.
68.
Vacation of Office of Vice-President: The office of the Vice-president shall fall vacant  in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President,
(b)
In case a motion of impeachment against him or her is adopted under
Article 101,
(c)
In case his or her term of office expires,
(d)
In case he or she dies.
69.
Other provisions relating to Vice-President: Provisions relating to the qualification,  procedures of election and   term of office of the Vice-President shall be the same as  that of the President.
70.
President and Vice-President to Belong to Different Sex or Community:  Election to  the President and the Vice-president under this Constitution shall be so made as to  have representation of different sex or community.
71.
Oath by President and Vice-President: Prior to assuming their respective offices, the
President shall take an oath of office and secrecy before the Chief Justice, and the
Vice-President, before the President, as provided for in the federal law.
72.
Remuneration and Facilities of President and Vice-President: The remuneration and  other facilities of the President and the Vice-president shall be as provided for in a
Federal Act, and until such Act is enacted as specified by the Government of Nepal.


73.
Office of President and Vice-President: (1) There shall be separate offices for the  performance of the functions of the President and the Vice-President.
(2) The Government of Nepal shall make arrangements for employees and  other provisions as required to perform the functions of the offices referred to in  clause (1).


Part-7
Federal Executive
74.
Form of Governance: The form of governance of Nepal shall be multi-party  competitive federal democratic republican parliamentary form of governance based  on pluralism.
75.
Executive Power: (1) The executive power of Nepal shall, in accordance with this
Constitution and law, be vested in the Council of Ministers.
(2) The responsibility for issuing general directives, controlling and regulating  the governance of Nepal shall, subject to this Constitution and law, lie in the Council  of Ministers.
(3) All federal executive functions of Nepal shall be performed in the name of  the Government of Nepal.
(4) Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the Government of Nepal  pursuant to clause (3) and other instruments of authorization pertaining thereto shall  be authenticated as provided for in the federal law.
76.
Constitution of Council of Ministers: (1) The President shall appoint the leader of the  parliamentary party that commands a majority in the House of Representatives as the
Prime Minister, and the Council of Ministers shall be constituted under his or her  chairpersonship.
(2) In cases where no party has a clear majority in the House of
Representatives pursuant to clause (1), the President shall appoint as the Prime
Minister a member of the House of Representatives who is able to command a  majority with the support of two or more parties representing to the House of
Representatives.
(3) In cases where the Prime Minister cannot be appointed pursuant to clause
(2) within thirty days after the date of declaration of the final results of election to the
House of Representatives or where the Prime Minister so appointed fails to secure a  vote of confidence pursuant to clause (4), the President shall appoint as the Prime
Minister the leader of the parliamentary party which has the highest number of  members in the House of Representatives.


(4) The Prime Minister appointed pursuant to clause (2) or (3) shall be  required to secure the vote of confidence from the House of Representatives within  thirty days after the date of such appointment.
(5) In cases where the Prime Minister appointed pursuant to clause (3) fails to  secure the vote of confidence pursuant to clause (4) and any member referred to in  clause (2) presents a ground on which he or she is able to secure the vote of  confidence in the House of Representatives, the President shall appoint such member  as the Prime Minister.
(6) The Prime Minister appointed pursuant to clause (5) shall be required to  secure the vote of confidence pursuant to clause (4).
(7) In cases where the Prime Minister appointed pursuant to clause (5) fails to  secure a vote of confidence or the Prime Minister cannot be appointed, the President  shall, on the recommendation of the Prime Minister, dissolve the House of
Representatives and appoint a date of election so that the election to another House of
Representatives is completed within six months.
(8) Procedures as to the appointment of the Prime Minister under this Article  shall be required to be completed within thirty-five days after the date of declaration  of the final results of election to the House of Representatives held under this
Constitution or the date on which the office of the Prime Minister has fallen vacant.
(9) The President shall, on recommendation of the Prime Minister, constitute  the Council of Ministers comprising a maximum of twenty-five Ministers including  the Prime Minister, in accordance with the inclusive principle, from amongst the  members of the Federal Parliament.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Minister" means a Deputy Prime
Minister, Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister.
(10) The Prime Minister and Ministers shall be collectively responsible to the
Federal Parliament, and the Ministers shall be individually responsible for the  business of their respective Ministries to the Prime Minister and the Federal
Parliament.
77.
Vacation of Office of Prime Minister and Minister: (1) The office of the Prime
Minister shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -


(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case a resolution of confidence is not adopted or a resolution of no  confidence is adopted against him or her pursuant to Article 100;
(c)
In case he or she ceases to be a member of the House of
Representatives;
(d)
In case he or she dies.
(2) The office of a Minister shall fall vacant in any of the following  circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Prime Minister;
(b)
In case the Prime Minister removes him or her from the office;
(c)
In case the office of Prime Minister falls vacant pursuant to sub- clause (a), (b) or (c) of clause (1);
(d)
In case he or she dies.
(3) In case the office of Prime Minister falls vacant pursuant to clause (1), the  same Council of Ministers shall continue to act until another Council of Ministers is  constituted.
Provided that in case the Prime Minister dies, the senior-most Minister shall  act as the Prime Minister until a new Prime Minister is appointed.
78.
Non-Member of Federal Parliament to become Minister: (1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in clause (9) of Article 76, the President may, on the  recommendation of the Prime Minister, appoint a person who is not a member of the
Federal Parliament as a Minister
(2) A Minister appointed pursuant to clause (1) shall be required to become a  member of the Federal Parliament within six months from the date of taking oath by  him or her.
(3) In the event of failure to obtain membership of the Federal Parliament  within the period referred to in clause (2), he or she shall not be qualified to be  reappointed to the office of Minister during the term of the then House of
Representatives.


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), a person who has lost  the election to the then House of Representatives shall not be eligible to be appointed  to the office of Minister as referred to in clause (1) during the term of such House of
Representatives.
79.
Remuneration and other Facilities of Prime Minister and Ministers: The remuneration  and other facilities of the Prime Minister and Ministers shall be as provided for in a
Federal Act. It shall be as specified by the Government of Nepal until such Act is  made.
80.
Oath: The Prime Minister, Deputy Prime Minister and Ministers shall, prior to  assuming their respective offices, take an oath of office and secrecy before the
President, and Ministers of State and Assistant Ministers, before the Prime Minister,  as provided for in the federal law.
81.
To inform President: The Prime Minister shall inform the President on the following  matters:-
(a)
Resolutions of the Council of Ministers;
(b)
Bills to be introduced in the Federal Parliament;
(c)
Such other necessary information as commanded by the President on  matters set forth in clauses (a) and (b); and
(d)
Current general state of affairs of Nepal and matters concerning foreign  relations.
82.
Transaction of Business of Government of Nepal: (1) The business of the Government  of Nepal shall be allocated and transacted in accordance with the rules approved by  the Government of Nepal.
(2) No question may be raised in any court as to whether or not the rules  referred to in clause (1) have been observed.


Part-8
Federal Legislature
83.
Federal Legislature: There shall be a Federal Legislature consisting of two Houses to  be known as the House of Representatives and the National Assembly, which shall be  called as the Federal Parliament.
84.
Composition of House of Representatives: (1) The House of Representatives shall  consist of a total of two hundred and seventy five members, as follows :-
(a)
One hundred and sixty-five members to be elected through the first  past the post electoral system, with one being elected from each of  one hundred and sixty-five election constituencies delimited in
Nepal on the basis of population and geographical convenience  and specificity;
(b)
One hundred and ten members to be elected through the proportional  electoral system where voters vote for political parties, with the whole  country being considered as a single election constituency.
(2) The federal law shall provide that in filing candidacy by political parties  for the election to the House of Representatives under the proportional electoral  system, representation shall be ensured on the basis of a closed list also from women,
Dalit, indigenous nationalities (Aadibasi Janajati) Khas Arya, Madhesi, Tharu,
Muslims and backward regions, on the basis of population. In so filing candidacy,  regard shall also be had to geography and regional balance.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "Khas Arya" means Kshetri, Brahmin,
Thakuri, Sanyasi (Dashnami) communities.
(3) In filing candidacy pursuant to clause (2), political parties shall provide for  representation of the persons with disabilities as well.
(4) Election to the House of Representatives referred to in clause (1) shall be  held through secret ballots in accordance with law.

 Amended by the First Amendment.


(5) Each citizen of Nepal who has completed the age of eighteen years shall  have the right to vote in any one election constituency as provided for in the federal  law.
(6) A person who is qualified pursuant to Article 87 and entitled to vote in an  election to the members of the House of Representatives may, subject to the federal  law, be a candidate in any election constituency.
Provided that a person shall not be a candidate in more than one election  constituencies at the same time.
(7) In case the seat of any member of the House of Representatives falls  vacant while its term still remains for more than six months, the vacancy shall be  fulfilled in the same manner of electoral system as in which such seat was fulfilled.
(8)
Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, at least one  third of the total number of members elected from each political party representing in  the Federal Parliament shall be women. In case women are not so elected as to  constitute one third of the elected members of any political party pursuant to sub- clause (a) of clause (1) and sub-clause (a) of clause (2) of Article 86, such political  party must, in electing members under sub-clause (b) of clause (1), so elect that  women members constitute at least one third of the total number of members elected  to the Federal Parliament from that party.
(9) Election to the House of Representatives and other matters pertaining  thereto shall be as provided for in the federal law.
85.
Term of House of Representatives: (1) Unless dissolved earlier in accordance with  this Constitution, the term of the House of Representatives shall be five years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the term of the House of
Representatives may be extended by a Federal Act for a period not exceeding one  year in cases where a proclamation or order of a state of emergency is in effect.
(3) The term of the House of Representatives extended pursuant to clause (2)  shall ipso facto expire upon the expiry of six months from the date of revocation of  the proclamation or order of the state of emergency.
86.
Composition of National Assembly and Term of Office of its Members: (1) The
National Assembly shall be a permanent House.


(2) The National Assembly shall consist of fifty-nine members as follows: -
(a)
Fifty six elected members consisting of at least three women, one
Dalit and one from persons with disabilities or minorities, from each
Province by an electoral college consisting of members of the
Provincial Assembly, chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of the Rural
Municipalities, and Mayors and Deputy-Mayors of the Municipalities,  with different weightage of vote by members of the Provincial
Assembly, chairpersons and vice-chairpersons of the Rural
Municipalities, and Mayors and Deputy-Mayors of the Municipalities,  as provided for in the federal law,
(b)
Three members consisting of at least one woman nominated by the
President on the recommendation of the Government of Nepal.
(3) The term of office of the members of the National Assembly shall be six  years. The term of office of one third of the members of the National Assembly shall  expire in every two years.
Provided that, for the first time after the commencement of this Constitution,  arrangements shall be made by drawing lots to retire one-third of the members on the  expiry of two years, another one-third on the expiry of four years, and the final one- third on the expiry of six years.
(4) In computing the term of office of the members of the National Assembly  for the first time after the commencement of this Constitution, the term of office of all  members shall be deemed to have commenced on the day on which the first session of  the National Assembly is held.
(5) Any vacancy of seat in the National Assembly shall be fulfilled for the  remainder of the term of office in the same manner of election or nomination as in  which the seat of the vacating member was fulfilled.
(6) Other matters relating to election to the members of the National Assembly  shall be as provided for in the federal law.
87.
Qualifications for Member: (1) A person who has the following qualifications shall be  eligible to become a member of the Federal Parliament:-
(a)
One who is a citizen of Nepal;


(b)
One who has completed the age of twenty-five years, for the House of
Representatives, and of thirty-five years for the National Assembly;
(c)
One who has not been convicted of a criminal offense involving moral  turpitude;
(d)
One who is not disqualified under any federal law; and
(e)
One who is not holding any office of profit.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "office of profit" means any position,  other than a political position which is to be fulfilled by election or nomination, for  which a remuneration or financial benefit is paid out of a government fund.
(2)  No person may be a member of both Houses at the same time.
(3) In case a person who holds a political office to be fulfilled by way of  election, nomination or appointment is elected or nominated as a member of the
Federal Parliament under this Part, his or her office shall ipso facto fall vacant from  the day on which he or she takes an oath of office of member of the Federal
Parliament.
88.
Oath: Every member of each House of the Federal Parliament shall be required,  before taking part for the first time in the meeting of the House or any of its  committees, to take an oath as provided for in the federal law.
89.
Vacation of Seat: The seat of a member of the Federal Parliament shall fall vacant in  any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Speaker or
Chairperson;
(b)
In case he or she is no longer qualified or ceases to possess the  qualification pursuant to Article 87;
(c)
In case the term of the House of Representatives or the term of office of  the member of the National Assembly expires;
(d)
In case he or she is absent   in ten consecutive meetings without  providing information to the concerned House;


(e)
In case the political party of which he or she was a member when elected  provides a notification in accordance with the federal law that he or she  has defected from the party,
(f)
In case he or she dies.
90.
Decision as to Disqualification of Member: In case question arises as to whether any  member of the Federal Parliament is disqualified or has become disqualified pursuant  to Article 87, the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court shall finally decide that  question.
91.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of House of Representatives: (1) The members of the
House of Representatives shall, within fifteen days of the date of holding of the first  meeting of the House of Representatives, elect a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker from  amongst themselves.
(2) Election pursuant to clause (1) shall be so held that there is one woman out  of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, and the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of  the House of Representatives shall be representatives from different parties.
Provided that in case there is no representation of more than one party in the
House of Representatives or no candidacy is filed by more than one party in spite of  representation, nothing shall prevent the members of the same party from being the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives.
(3) In case the office of the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker falls vacant, the  members of the House of Representatives shall fulfil the vacancy by electing the
Speaker or Deputy Speaker from amongst themselves.
(4) The Deputy Speaker shall, in the absence of the Speaker, preside over the
House of Representatives.
(5) In case election to the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker is not held or in  case both the positions fall vacant, the attending member who is by age the senior- most shall preside over the meeting of the House of Representatives.
(6) The office of the Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the House of
Representatives shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she ceases to be a member of the House of
Representatives;


Provided that, in the event of dissolution of the House of
Representatives, the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of
Representatives holding their respective offices shall continue in  office until the previous day of the filing of nominations for another  election to the House of Representatives;
(b)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing;
(c)
In case a resolution is adopted by a majority of two-thirds of the total  number of the then members of the House of Representatives that his  or her conduct is not compatible with his or her office.
(7) The Deputy Speaker shall preside over a meeting at which deliberations  are to be held on a resolution that the conduct of the Speaker of the House of
Representatives is not compatible with his or her office. The Speaker of the House of
Representatives may take part and vote in the deliberations on such resolution.
92.
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of National Assembly: (1) The members of the
National Assembly shall, within fifteen days of the date of holding of its first meeting,  elect the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly from  amongst themselves.
(2) Election pursuant to clause (1) shall be so held that there is one woman out  of the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly.
(3) In case the office of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the National
Assembly falls vacant, the members of the National Assembly shall fulfil the vacancy  by electing its Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson from amongst themselves.
(4) The Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly shall, in the absence of its
Chairperson, preside over the National Assembly.
(5) In case the election to the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the
National Assembly is not held or in case both the positions fall vacant, the member  who is by age the senior-most out of the attending members shall preside over the  meeting of the National Assembly.
(6) The office of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson of the National
Assembly shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she ceases to be a member of the National Assembly;


(b)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing;
(c)
In case a resolution is adopted by a majority of two-thirds of the total  number of the then members of the National Assembly that his or her  conduct is not compatible with the office.
(7) The Vice-Chairperson of the National Assembly shall preside over a  meeting at which deliberations are to be held on a resolution that the conduct of the
Chairperson of the National Assembly is not compatible with his or her office. The
Chairperson of the National Assembly may take part and vote in the deliberations on  such resolution.
93.
Summoning and Prorogation of Session: (1) The President shall summon a session of  the Federal Parliament within thirty days of the declaration of final results of the  election to the House of Representatives. Thereafter, the President shall, from time to  time, summon sessions of both or either of the Houses in accordance with this
Constitution.
Provided that the interval between the two consecutive sessions shall not  exceed six months.
(2) The President may prorogue the sessions of both or either of the Houses of  the Federal Parliament.
(3) In case, during the prorogation or recess of the session of the House of
Representatives, one-fourth of the total number of its members submit a requisition in  writing that it is appropriate to convene a session or meeting, the President shall  specify the date and time for such session or meeting. The House of Representatives  shall meet or commence its session at the date and time so specified.
94.
Quorum: Except as otherwise provided for in this Constitution, no question or motion  shall be presented for a decision in a meeting of either House of the Federal
Parliament unless one-fourth of the total number of its members are present.
95.
Address by President: (1) The President may address either a meeting of any House or  a joint sitting of both Houses of the Federal Parliament, and may summon the  members for that purpose.


(2) The President shall address the first session after election to the House of
Representatives and a joint sitting of both Houses of the Federal Parliament after the  commencement of the first session of each year.
96.
Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister entitled to  take part in both Houses: The Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of State and
Assistant Minister shall be entitled to attend and take part in the proceedings and  deliberations of either House of the Federal Parliament or its committees.
Provided that he or she shall not be entitled to vote in a House or its committee  of which he or she is not a member.
97.
Constitution of Committees: (1) The House of Representatives and the National
Assembly may constitute committees as provided for in the federal law.
(2) In case a resolution is adopted by either House demanding that a joint  committee of both the Houses be constituted for the purpose of managing the working  procedures between the two Houses of the Federal Parliament, resolving disagreement  on any Bill or for any other specified function, a joint committee thereon shall be  constituted. The joint committee shall consist of a maximum of twenty-five members  in the ratio of five members from the House of Representatives to one member from  the National Assembly on the basis of inclusion.
98.
Transaction of Business In case of Vacancy of Seat of a Member: Either House of the
Federal Parliament shall have the power to transact its business notwithstanding any  vacancy in a seat of its member. No proceedings of either House of the Federal
Parliament shall become invalid even in case it is subsequently discovered that a  person who was not so entitled took part in such proceedings.
99.
Voting: Except as otherwise provided for in this Constitution, any motion submitted  for decision in either House of the Federal Parliament shall be decided by a majority  vote of the members present and voting. The member presiding over the meeting shall  not have the right to vote.
Provided that he or she may exercise the casting vote in case of a tie of votes.
100.
Provisions relating to Vote of Confidence and Motion of No Confidence: (1) The
Prime Minister may, whenever he or she considers necessary or appropriate to show

that he or she has confidence from the House of Representatives, table a motion in the
House of Representatives for the vote of confidence.
(2) In case the political party, which the Prime Minister represents, is divided  or a political party in coalition government withdraws its support, the Prime Minister  shall table a motion in the House of Representatives for a vote of confidence within  thirty days.
(3) In case a motion tabled pursuant to clauses (1) and (2) is not adopted by a  majority of the total number of the then members of the House of Representatives, the
Prime Minister shall be relieved of his or her office.
(4) One-fourth of the total number of the then members of the House of
Representatives may table a motion of no confidence in writing that the House has no  confidence in the Prime Minister.
Provided that a motion of no confidence shall not be tabled until the first two  years after the appointment of the Prime Minister and until another one year after the  date of failure of the motion of no confidence once tabled.
(5) A motion of no confidence to be tabled pursuant to clause (4) shall also  mention the name of a member proposed for the Prime Minister.
(6) In case a motion of no confidence tabled pursuant to clause (4) is adopted  by a majority of the total number of the then members of the House of
Representatives, the Prime Minister shall be relieved of his or her office.
(7) In case the office of Prime Minister falls vacant because of the adoption of  a motion of no confidence pursuant to clause (6), the President shall, pursuant to
Article 76, appoint as the Prime Minister the member of the House of Representatives  proposed pursuant to clause (5).
101.
Impeachment: (1) One fourth of the total number of the then members of the House of
Representatives may move a motion of impeachment against the President or Vice-
President on the ground of serious violation of this Constitution and law. In case the  motion is adopted by at least two thirds majority of the total number of the then  members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament, he or she shall be relieved of his  or her office.


(2) One fourth of the total number of the then members of the House of
Representatives may move a motion of impeachment against the Chief Justice of
Nepal or a Justice of Supreme Court, member of the Judicial Council, chief or official  of a Constitutional Body on the ground of his or her failure to fulfil his or her duties  of the office because of serious violation of this Constitution and law, incompetence  or misconduct or failure to discharge the duties of the office honestly or serious  violation of the code of conduct. In case the motion is adopted by at least two thirds  majority of the total number of the then members of the House of Representatives, the  concerned person shall be relieved of his or her office.
(3) There shall be an impeachment recommendation committee in the House  of Representatives for the purpose of making recommendation after inquiring into  whether or not there exists ground and reason for moving a motion of impeachment  against any person referred to in clause (2).
(4) The committee referred to in clause (3) shall consist of eleven members of  the House of Representatives.
(5) In case at least three members of the House of Representatives certify and  submit that the received information, notice or complaint is admissible on the ground  of serious violation of the Constitution or incompetence or misconduct or failure to  discharge the duties of office honestly or serious violation of the code of conduct by  the person relieving of office on impeachment pursuant to clause (2), and the  committee referred to in clause (3) makes recommendation, upon inquiring into such  complaint in accordance with federal law, to the House of Representatives for  impeachment proceedings, a motion of impeachment may be moved pursuant to  clause (2).
(6) After the commencement of impeachment proceedings pursuant to clause
(2), the Chief Justice of Nepal or the Justice of Supreme Court, the member of the
Judicial Council, the chief or official of the Constitutional Body shall not be allowed  to discharge the duties of his or her office pending the settlement of such proceedings.
(7) A person who is charged with impeachment pursuant to clause (1) or (2)  shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to defend himself or herself.
(8) Nothing shall bar the taking of action under the federal law in relation to  the offence, if any, committed while in office by the President or Vice-President, the


Chief Justice of Nepal or a Justice of Supreme Court of Nepal, the member of the
Judicial Council, the chief or official of a Constitutional Body who is relieved of  office upon the adoption of a motion of impeachment under this Article.
(9) A person who is relieved of the office on the adoption of a motion of  impeachment pursuant to clause (1) or (2) shall not be entitled to obtain any facility  accruing from such office and to be appointed or nominated to any public office in the  future.
(10) Other matters relating to impeachment shall be as provided for in the  federal law.
102.
Penalty for Unauthorized Presence or Voting: In case a person who has not taken oath  pursuant to Article 88 or who is not a member of the Federal Parliament is present or  casts vote in the capacity of a member in a meeting of either House of the Federal
Parliament or of its committee, the person shall, by order of the person presiding over  the meeting, be fined with a sum of five thousand rupees for each instance of such  presence or voting, and such fine shall be recovered as a government due.
103.
Privileges: (1) There shall be full freedom of speech in both Houses of the Federal
Parliament; and no member shall be arrested, detained or prosecuted in any court for  anything expressed or any vote cast by him or her in the House.
(2) Each House of the Federal Parliament shall, subject to this Constitution,  have full power to regulate and decide its internal business, and the concerned House  shall have the exclusive right to decide whether or not any of its proceedings is  regular or irregular. No question shall be raised in any court in this regard.
(3) No comment shall be made about good faith concerning any proceeding of  any House of the Federal Parliament, and no publication and broadcasting of any type  shall be made about anything said by any member, intentionally distorting or  misinterpreting the meaning of the speech.
(4) The provisions of clauses (1) and (3) shall apply also to persons, other than  the members of the Federal Parliament, who are entitled to participate in the meetings  of the House.


(5) No proceedings shall be initiated in any court against any person in respect  of the publication, under the authority granted by any House of the Federal
Parliament, of any document, report, vote or proceeding.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause and clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4), "House"  means the House of Representatives or the National Assembly, and includes a joint  sitting or committee or joint committee of the Federal Parliament.
(6) No member of the Federal Parliament shall be arrested during the period  from the issuance of a notice summoning the session to its prorogation.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the arrest under  the federal law of any member on a criminal charge. In case any member is so  arrested, the authority making such arrest shall forthwith give information thereof to  the person presiding over the concerned House.
(7) Any breach of the privileges shall be deemed to constitute the contempt of  the Federal Parliament, and the concerned House shall have the exclusive right to  decide whether or not any privilege has been breached.
(8) In case any person is in contempt of any House, the person presiding over  the concerned House may, after a decision by the House to that effect, admonish, warn  or impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months or of a  fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees on such person, and such fine shall be  recovered as a government due.
Provided that in case such person apologies to the satisfaction of the  concerned House, the House may pardon, remit or commute the sentence imposed on  him or her.
(9) Other matters relating to the privileges of the Federal Parliament shall be  as provided for in the federal law.
104.
Procedures relating to Conduct of Business: (1) Each House of the Federal Parliament  shall frame rules to conduct its business, maintain order during its meetings and  regulate the constitution, functions and procedures of the committees and procedures  of the House or its committee. Until such rules are framed, the Federal Parliament  shall regulate its procedures on its own.


(2) The conduct of business of the joint sitting of the Federal Parliament and  constitution and proceedings of the joint committee of the Federal Parliament shall be  regulated by the rules or procedures approved by the joint sitting of both Houses of  the Federal Parliament.
105.
Restriction on Discussion: No discussion shall be held in either House of the Federal
Parliament on any matters that may cause adverse effect on the dispensation of justice  in cases which are sub judice in any court of Nepal and in any judicial act carried out  by Judges in the course of performance of their duties.
Provided that nothing in this Article shall be deemed to bar the expression of  opinions about the conduct of a Judge during deliberations held on a motion of  impeachment.
106.
Secretary General and Secretary of Federal Parliament: (1) The President shall  appoint the Secretary General of the House of Representatives on recommendation of  both the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Chairperson of the National
Assembly, the Secretary of the House of Representatives on recommendation of the
Speaker, and the Secretary of the National Assembly on recommendation of the
Chairperson.
(2) The qualification, functions, duties, powers and other conditions of service  of the Secretary General of the Federal Parliament, Secretary of the House of
Representatives and Secretary of the National Assembly shall be as provided for in  the federal law.
107.
Secretariat of Federal Parliament: There shall be a Secretariat for conducting and  managing the business of the Federal Parliament. The establishment of such
Secretariat and other matters related thereto shall be as provided for in the federal law.
108.
Remuneration: The remuneration and facilities of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker  of the House of Representatives, the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the
National Assembly, chairpersons of the committees and members of the Federal
Parliament shall be as provided for in the federal law, and shall be as specified by the
Government of Nepal until such law is made.


Part-9
Federal Legislative Procedures
109.
Legislative Powers of Federal Parliament: The legislative powers of the Federal
Parliament shall be as enumerated in the lists of Schedule-5, Schedule-7 and
Schedule-9.
110.
Procedures for Introduction of Bills: (1) A Bill may, subject to this Constitution, be  introduced in any House of the Federal Parliament.
Provided that a Money Bill shall be introduced only in the House of
Representatives.
(2) A Money Bill and a Bill concerning a security institution including the
Nepal Army, Nepal Police and Armed Police Force, Nepal shall be introduced only as  a Government Bill.
(3) "Money Bill" means a Bill concerning any or all of the following matters: -
(a)
Matters concerning Imposition, collection, abolition, remission,  alteration or regulation of taxes;
(b)
Matters concerning preservation of the Federal Consolidated Fund or  any other Federal Government Fund, the deposit of moneys into or  the appropriation or the withdrawal of moneys from such Funds, or  the reduction, increment or cancellation of appropriations of proposed  expenditures from such Funds;
(c)  Regulation of matters relating to the borrowing of money or the  guarantee to be given by the Government of Nepal, or any matter  pertaining to the amendment of the law with respect to any financial  obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Government of
Nepal,
(d)
Matters concerning custody of all revenues received by the Federal
Government Fund, moneys acquired through the repayment of loans,  and grant moneys, investments to be made or accounts or audits of the  accounts of the Government of Nepal; and


(e)
Other incidental matters directly related to any of the matters  specified in clause (a), (b), (c) or (d).
Provided that any Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill only by  the reason that it provides for the levying of any charges, fees or tariff such as  license fee, application fee, renewal fee or for the imposition of fines or  penalty of imprisonment.
(4) In case any question arises as to whether or not a Bill is a Money Bill, the  decision of the Speaker shall be final.
111.
Procedures for Adoption of Bills: (1) A Bill adopted by one House of the Federal
Parliament shall be transmitted to the other House as soon as possible and such Bill  shall, if adopted by the receiving House, be submitted to the President for  authentication.
(2) A Money Bill adopted by the House of Representatives shall be  transmitted to the National Assembly. The National Assembly shall, after  deliberations on such Bill, send the Bill back to the House of Representatives within  fifteen days from the date of receipt of the Bill, with suggestions, if any.
(3) The House of Representatives shall, upon deliberations on a Bill returned  with suggestions pursuant to clause (2), present the Bill incorporating such  suggestions as it may deem appropriate to the President for authentication.
(4) In case the National Assembly does not return a Money Bill received  pursuant to clause (2) for more than fifteen days, the House of Representatives may  present the Bill to the President for authentication.
(5) Any Bill, except for a Money Bill, adopted by the House of
Representatives and transmitted to the National Assembly shall be returned with  approval or suggestions within two months from the date of receipt. In case the
National Assembly does not return the Bill within that period, the House of
Representatives may, by a resolution adopted by a majority of the total number of its  the then existing members, present the Bill to the President for authentication.
(6) In case any Bill, other than a Money Bill, adopted by one House is rejected  or is accepted with amendments by the other House, the Bill shall be returned to the
House where it was originated.


(7) In case the House of Representatives, in considering a Bill which has been  rejected or amended and returned by the National Assembly pursuant to clause (6),  adopts it again as it was or with amendments, by a majority of the total number of the  then existing members, the Bill shall be submitted to the President for authentication.
(8) In case a Bill which has been returned with amendments by the House of
Representatives to the National Assembly pursuant to clause (6) is also again adopted,  with such amendments, by a majority of the number of the then existing members of  the National Assembly, the Bill shall be submitted to the President for authentication.
(9) The following Bills shall be referred to a joint sitting of the both Houses,  and in case the joint sitting adopts the Bill as it was or with amendments, the House in  which the Bill originated shall present it to the President for authentication:-
(a)
A Bill which, though adopted by the National Assembly, has been  rejected by the House of Representatives; or
(b)
A Bill which has been sent back to the National Assembly with  amendments by the House of Representatives, but the National
Assembly has not agreed on such amendments.
(10) Even though a session of a House is prorogued while a Bill is under its  consideration, deliberations on the Bill may continue at the succeeding session.
Provided that in case the House of Representatives is dissolved or its term  expires when any Bill introduced in the House of Representatives is under its  consideration or when any Bill adopted by the House of Representatives is under  consideration in the National Assembly, such Bill shall lapse.
112.
Withdrawal of Bills: A Bill may be withdrawn by the member introducing it with the  approval of the House.
113.
Authentication on Bills: (1) The Bill to be presented to the President for  authentication pursuant to Article 111 shall be certified by the Speaker or the
Chairperson of the House in which the Bill originated and so presented.
Provided that in case of a Money Bill, the Speaker shall so certify.
(2) A Bill presented to the President for his or her authentication in accordance  with this Article shall be authenticated within fifteen days, and both Houses shall be  informed thereof as soon as possible.


(3) In case the President is of the opinion that any Bill, except a Money Bill,  presented for authentication needs reconsideration, he or she may, within fifteen days  from the date of submission of such Bill, send back the Bill along with his or her  message to the House in which the Bill originated.
(4) In case any Bill is sent back along with a message by the President, and  both Houses reconsider and adopt such Bill as it was or with amendments and present  it again, the President shall authenticate that Bill within fifteen days of such  presentation.
(5) A Bill shall become an Act after the President authenticates it.
114.
Provisions relating to Ordinance: (1) In case, at any time, except when both Houses of  the Federal Parliament are in session, circumstances exist which render it necessary to  take immediate action, the President may, on recommendation of the Council of
Ministers, promulgate an Ordinance.
(2) The Ordinance promulgated pursuant to clause (1) shall have the same  force and effect as an Act.
Provided that every such Ordinance,-
(a)
Shall be tabled at the session of both Houses of the Federal
Parliament held after the promulgation, and in case not adopted by  both Houses, it shall, ipso facto, cease to be effective;
(b)
May be repealed at any time by the President; and
(c)
Shall, unless rendered ineffective or repealed pursuant to sub-clause
(a) or (b), ipso facto cease to be effective at the expiration of sixty  days after the day on which a meeting of both Houses is held.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "day on which a meeting of both
Houses is held" means the day on which a session or meeting of both Houses  of the Federal Parliament commences or is held, and this term means the later  day on which a meeting of the House is held in case the Houses of the Federal
Parliament meet on different dates.


Part-10
Federal Financial Procedures
115.
No tax to be levied or Loan to be raised:  (1) No tax shall be levied and collected  except in accordance with law.
(2) No loan shall be raised and guarantee be given by the Government of
Nepal except as provided for in the federal law.
116.
Federal Consolidated Fund: Except for the revenues of trusts (Guthi), all revenues  received by the Government of Nepal, all loans raised on the security of revenues, all  amounts received in repayment of any loan made under the authority of any Act and  any other moneys received by the Government of Nepal shall, except as otherwise  provided by a Federal Act, be credited to a Government Fund to be known as the
Federal Consolidated Fund.
117.
Expenditures from Federal Consolidated Fund or Federal Government Fund: No  expenditure shall be incurred out of the Federal Consolidated Fund or any other
Federal Government Fund except the following:-
(a)
Moneys charged on the Federal Consolidated Fund;
(b)
Moneys required to meet the expenditure under a Federal
Appropriation Act;
(c)
Advance moneys authorized by a Federal Act required to meet  expenditures, when an Appropriation Bill is under consideration; or
(d)
Expenditures to be incurred in extraordinary circumstances under a
Federal Vote of Credit Act, which contains only a description of  expenditures.

Provided that matters relating to the Federal Contingency Fund  shall be governed by Article 124.
118.
Expenditures Chargeable on Federal Consolidated Fund:  The expenditures relating to  the following matters shall be charged on the Federal Consolidated Fund, and  approval of the Federal Parliament shall not be required for such expenditures:-


(a)
The amount required as remuneration and facilities of the President and  the Vice-president;
(b)
The amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the Chief
Justice of Nepal, Justices of the Supreme Court, and members of the
Judicial Council;
(c)
The amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives, and  the Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson of the National Assembly;
(d)
The amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the chiefs  and officials of the Constitutional Bodies,
(e)
The amount required as remuneration and facilities of the Chiefs of
Provinces,
(f)
The administrative expenses of the Office of the President or the Vice
President, the Supreme Court, the Judicial Council, the Constitutional
Bodies, and the offices of Chiefs of Provinces;
(g)
All charges relating to debts for which the Government of Nepal is  liable;
(h)
Any sum required to satisfy any judgment or decree made by a court  against the Government of Nepal; and
(i)
Any other sum to be chargeable by the federal law on the Federal
Consolidated Fund.
119.
Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures: (1) The Minister for Finance of the
Government of Nepal shall, in respect of every fiscal year, lay before the joint sitting  of both Houses of the Federal Parliament an annual estimate setting out, inter alia, the  following matters:-
(a)
Estimate of revenues;
(b)
Moneys required to meet the charges on the Federal Consolidated
Fund; and
(c)
Moneys required to meet the expenditure to be provided for in the
Federal Appropriation Act.


(2) The annual estimate to be laid pursuant to clause (1) shall also be  accompanied by a statement of the expenses allocated to every Ministry in the  previous fiscal year and particulars of whether or not the objectives of the expenses  have been achieved.
(3) The Minister for Finance of the Government of Nepal shall lay before the
Federal Parliament an estimate of revenues and expenditures referred to in clause (1)  on the 15th of Jeshta (mid May) each year.
120.
Appropriation Act: The moneys to be spent under an Appropriation Act shall be  specified under concerned heads in the Appropriation Bill.
121.
Supplementary Estimate: (1) The Minister for Finance of the Government of Nepal  may lay before the House of Representatives a supplementary estimate in case it is  found in any fiscal year:-
(a)
That the sum authorized to be spent for a particular service by the
Appropriation Act for the current fiscal year is insufficient, or that a  need has arisen for expenditures on some new service not provided  for in the Appropriation Act for that year; or
(b)
That the expenditures made during that fiscal year are in excess of the  amount authorized by the Appropriation Act.
(2) The sums included in the supplementary estimate shall be specified under  the related heads in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
122.
Votes on Account: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, a  portion of the expenditure estimated for the fiscal year may, when an Appropriation
Bill is under consideration, be incurred in advance, as provided for in Federal Act.
(2) No Vote on Account Bill shall be introduced until the estimates of revenues  and expenditures have been laid pursuant to Article 119, and the sums involved in the
Vote on Account shall not exceed one-third of the estimate of expenditures for the  fiscal year.
(3) The expenditures incurred in accordance with the Federal Vote on Account
Act shall be included in the Appropriation Bill.
123.
Votes of Credit: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, in case  owing to an emergency due to either natural causes or a threat of external aggression

or internal disturbances or other reasons, it appears to be impractical or inexpedient in  view of the security or interest of the State to specify the details required pursuant to  clause (1) of Article 119, the Minister for Finance of the Government of Nepal may  lay before the House of Representatives a Vote of Credit Bill giving only a statement  of expenditures.
124.
Federal Contingency Fund: (1) A Federal Act may create a fund to be known as the  contingency fund into which such moneys as may be determined by the Federal Act  shall be deposited from time to time.
(2) The fund referred to in the clause (1) shall be under the control of the
Government of Nepal and may meet any unforeseen expenditure out of such fund.
(3) The amount of the expenditure referred to in clause (2) shall be  reimbursed as soon as possible as provided for in the Federal Act.
125.
Act relating to Financial Procedures: Matters relating to the transfer of moneys  appropriated by a Federal Act from one head to another and other financial procedures  shall be as provided for in the Federal Act.


Part-11
Judiciary
126.
Courts to Exercise Powers relating to Justice: (1) Powers relating to justice in Nepal  shall be exercised by courts and other judicial institutions in accordance with this
Constitution, other laws and recognized principles of justice.
(2) All shall abide by the orders or decisions made by courts in the course of  hearing of lawsuit.
127.
Courts: (1) There shall be the following courts in Nepal:-
(a)
Supreme Court;
(b)
High Court; and
(c)
District Court.
(2) In addition to the courts referred to in clause (1), judicial institutions may  be constituted at the local level to try cases under law or other institutions as required  may be formed to pursue alternative dispute resolution methods.
128.
Supreme Court:  (1) There shall be a Supreme Court of Nepal.
(2) The Supreme Court shall be a court of record. All courts and judicial  institutions shall, except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, be under the
Supreme Court. The Supreme Court shall have the final authority to interpret this
Constitution and laws.
(3) The Supreme Court may inspect, supervise and give necessary directives  to, itself and courts, specialized courts or other judicial institutions under its  jurisdiction, on matters relating to administration of justice or management.
(4) All shall abide by any interpretation of the Constitution or a law made by  or any legal principle laid down by the Supreme Court in the course of hearing a  lawsuit. In case anyone makes obstruction in the dispensation of justice or disregard  any order or judgment handed down by it or any of its subordinate courts, the
Supreme Court may, in accordance with law, initiate proceedings of contempt and  impose punishment therefor.


129.
Appointment and Qualification of Chief Justice of Nepal and Justices of Supreme
Court: (1) The Supreme Court shall consist of a maximum of twenty Justices, in  addition to the Chief Justice of Nepal.
(2) The President shall appoint the Chief Justice on recommendation of the
Constitutional Council and other Justices of the Supreme Court on recommendation  of the Judicial Council.
(3) Any person who has served as a Justice of the Supreme Court for at least  three years shall be eligible for appointment as the Chief Justice.
(4) The term of office of the Chief Justice shall be six years.
(5) Any citizen of Nepal who has obtained a bachelor's degree in law and  served as the Chief Judge or a Judge of a High Court for at least five years or who has  obtained a bachelor's degree in law and constantly practised law as a senior advocate  or advocate for at least fifteen years or who is a distinguished jurist having constantly  worked for at least fifteen years in the judicial or legal field or who has served in the  post of Gazetted first class or a higher post of the Judicial Service for at least twelve  years shall be deemed to be eligible for appointment as a Justice of the Supreme
Court.
Explanation: The period during which one has served as the Chief Judge or Judge of  an Appellate Court prior to the commencement of this Constitution shall, for the  purposes of this clause, be deemed to be the period of service in the capacity of the
Chief Judge or Judge of the High Court.
(6) In case the office of the Chief Justice falls vacant or the Chief Justice is  unable to carry out the duties of his or her office by reason of illness or otherwise or  he or she cannot be present in the Supreme Court by reason of a leave of absence or  his or her being outside of Nepal, the senior-most Justice of Supreme Court shall act  as the Acting Chief Justice.
130.
Conditions of Service and Facilities of Chief Justice and Justices: (1) In case the Chief
Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court who has served for at least five years resigns  or undergoes compulsory retirement or dies, he or she shall be entitled to such pension  as may be provided for in the federal law.


(2) Except otherwise provided for in this Constitution, the remuneration and  other conditions of service of the Chief Justice and Justices of the Supreme Court  shall be as provided for in the federal law.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1) and (2), the Chief
Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court who has been removed from the office by  way of impeachment or who has been punished by a court for a criminal offence  involving moral turpitude shall not be entitled to gratuity or pension.
(4) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief Justice or a
Justice of the Supreme Court shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
131.
Vacation of office of Chief Justice or Justice of Supreme Court: The office of the
Chief Justice or a Justice of the Supreme Court shall fall vacant in any of the  following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her pursuant  to Article 101;
(d)  In case the Chief Justice or a Justice of Supreme Court is relieved of his  or her office by the President, in the case of Chief Justice on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council, and in the case of Justice  of Supreme Court, on recommendation of the Judicial Council, on the  ground that he or she is unable to discharge his or her duties because of  physical or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she is punished by a court for a criminal offence involving  moral turpitude;
(f)
In case he or she dies.
132.
Chief Justice and Justice of Supreme Court not to be engaged in Any Other Office: (1)
No Chief Justice or Justice of the Supreme Court shall be engaged in or deputed to  any office other than that of a Judge.


Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Judicial
Council, depute a Justice of the Supreme Court to work concerning judicial inquiry, or  to legal or judicial investigation or research for a specified period.
(2) No person who has once held the office of Chief Justice or a Justice of the
Supreme Court shall be eligible for appointment to any government office, except as  otherwise provided for in this Constitution.
133.
Jurisdiction of Supreme Court: (1) Any citizen of Nepal may file a petition in the
Supreme Court to have any law or any part thereof declared void on the ground of  inconsistency with this Constitution because it imposes unreasonable restriction on  the enjoyment of any fundamental right conferred by this Constitution or on any other  ground; or to have any law or any part thereof made by a Provincial Assembly  declared void because it is inconsistent with any law made by the Federal Parliament;  or to have any law or any part thereof made by a Municipal Assembly or Rural
Municipal Assembly declared void because it is inconsistent with a law made by the
Federal Parliament or the Provincial Assembly; the Supreme Court shall have an  extra-ordinary power to declare such law to be void either ab initio or from the date of  its decision in case the law in question  appears to be so inconsistent.
(2) The Supreme Court shall, for the enforcement of the fundamental rights  conferred by this Constitution or of any other legal right for which no other remedy  has been provided for or for which the remedy even though provided appears to be  inadequate or ineffective or for the settlement of any constitutional or legal question  involved in any dispute of public interest or concern; have the extraordinary power to  issue necessary and appropriate orders, provide appropriate remedies, enforce such  right or settle such dispute.
(3) Under the extra-ordinary jurisdiction referred to in clause (2), the Supreme
Court may issue appropriate orders and writs including the writs of habeas corpus,  mandamus, certiorari, prohibition and quo warranto.
Provided that except on the ground of absence of jurisdiction, the Supreme
Court shall not under this clause interfere with any internal proceedings of the Federal
Parliament or Provincial Assembly, and with any proceedings instituted by the Federal
Parliament or Provincial Assembly concerning violation of its privileges and penalties  imposed therefor.


(4) Subject to this Constitution, the Supreme Court shall, as provided for in the  federal law, have the power to originally try and settle cases, hear appeals, test  judgments referred for confirmation, revise cases, hear petitions or review its  judgments or final orders. While so reviewing the judgements, Justices other than  those having handed down the previous judgment shall make such review.
(5) The Supreme Court shall have the power to settle appeals from cases  originally heard and settled by a High Court and matters of public importance  involving questions of interpretation of the Constitution and law or cases  recommended by a High Court, accompanied by its opinion that it is reasonable that  decision be made by the Supreme Court.
(6) Other powers and procedures of the Supreme Court shall be as provided  for in the federal law.
134.
Power to Transfer Cases: (1) In case the cases which involve substantially the same  questions are sub judice before the Supreme Court and a High Court, and the Supreme
Court is satisfied on its own or on application by the Attorney General or parties to  such cases that such questions are of public importance, the Supreme Court shall have  the power to procure and adjudge the cases together.
(2) In case there exists a special circumstance where judicial impartiality may  be questioned if a case filed in a High Court is heard by that Court, the Supreme Court  may, stating the reasons and grounds thereof, order such case to be transferred from  such High Court to another High Court and be heard by the latter High Court, in  accordance with law.
135.
Not to be engaged in Practice of Law: No Chief Justice or Justice of the Supreme
Court shall, after retirement from office, be engaged in the practice of law, mediation  or arbitration proceedings before any office or court.
136.
Responsibility of Chief Justice: The Chief Justice shall have the ultimate  responsibility to make effective the administration of justice by the Supreme Court,  subordinate courts, specialized courts or other judicial institution.
137.
Constitution of Constitutional Bench: (1) There shall be a Constitutional Bench in the
Supreme Court. The Constitutional Bench shall consist of the Chief Justice and other  four Justices designated by the Chief Justice on recommendation of the Judicial
Council.


(2) The Bench referred to in clause (1) shall originally hear and settle the  following cases, in addition to the petitions filed pursuant to clause (1) of Article
133:-
(a)
Disputes relating to jurisdiction between the Federation and a
Province, between Provinces, between a Province and a Local Level  and between Local Levels;
(b)
Disputes relating to election to members of the Federal Parliament or
Provincial Assembly and matters relating to disqualification of a  member of the Federal Parliament or of the Provincial Assembly.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Article 133, in case it appears that  any case sub judice in the Supreme Court involves a question of serious constitutional  interpretation, the Chief Justice may appoint such case to be heard by the Bench  referred to in clause (1).
(4) Other provisions relating to the functioning of the Constitutional Bench  shall be as determined by the Supreme Court.
138.
Annual Report: (1) The Supreme Court, Judicial Council and Judicial Service
Commission shall submit every year annual reports to the President, and the President  shall submit such reports to the Federal Parliament through the Prime Minister.
(2) In case the Federal Parliament, upon deliberating on the annual reports  submitted pursuant to clause (1), deems it necessary to give any suggestion, it may  give such suggestion to the concerned institution through the Government of Nepal,
Ministry of Law and Justice.
(3) Other provisions relating to annual reports referred to in clause (1) shall be  as provided for in the federal law.
139.
High Courts:  (1) There shall be a High Court in each Province.
(2) In case anyone makes obstruction in the dispensation of justice by, or  disregard any order or judgment handed down by, it or any of its subordinate courts or  judicial institutions, the High Court may initiate proceedings on and impose  punishment for contempt, as provided for in the federal law.
(3) Each High Court shall consist of such number of Judges, in addition to the
Chief Judge, as provided for in the federal law.


140.
Appointment and Qualification of Chief Judge and Judges of High Court: (1) The
Chief Justice shall, on recommendation of the Judicial Council, appoint the Chief
Judge and Judges of the High Court.
(2) Any citizen of Nepal who has obtained a bachelor's degree in law and  served as a Judge of a District Court for at least five years or who has obtained a  bachelor's degree in law and constantly practised law as a senior advocate or advocate  for at least ten years or who has constantly been engaged in the teaching or research  of law or in any other field relation to law or justice for at least ten years or who has  served in the post of at least Gazetted first class of the Judicial Service for at least five  years shall be deemed to be eligible for appointment as the Chief Judge or a Judge of  the High Court.
(3) Appointments to the Chief Judge and Judges of a High Court shall be made  from amongst the persons who have possessed the qualifications referred to in clause
(2) on the basis of the proportion of cases settled by him or her annually and of  evaluation of cases upheld, quashed or reversed by superior courts in the course of  final decision thereof, in the case of a District Judge, and of his or her seniority,  qualification and evaluation of standard of performance of business, in the case of a  person who has served in the post of at least Gazetted first class of the Judicial
Service, and of evaluation of seniority, professional continuity, honesty, professional  conduct and contribution made to the field of law and justice, in the case of others.
(4) In case the office of the Chief Judge falls vacant or the Chief Judge is  otherwise unable to carry out the duties of his or her office or cannot be present in the
High Court by reason of a leave of absence or his or her being outside of the Province,  the senior-most Judge of the High Court shall act as the Acting Chief Judge.
141.
Conditions of Service and Facilities of Chief Judge and Judges: (1) Except as  otherwise provided for in this Constitution, the remuneration and other conditions of  service of the Chief Judge and Judges of the High Court shall be as provided for in the  federal law.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the Chief Judge or a
Judge of a High Court who has been removed from office upon action taken by the
Judicial Council or upon punishment by a court for a criminal offence involving moral  turpitude shall not be entitled to gratuity or pension.


Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where the Judicial Council  has removed him or her from office on the ground of inability to perform the duties of  his or her office because of physical or mental illness.
(3) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief Judge or a
Judge of the High Court shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
142.
Vacation of office of Chief Judge or Judge: (1) The office of Chief Judge or Judge of a
High Court shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief Justice;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-three years;
(c)
In case he or she is relieved of office by the Chief Justice on  recommendation of the Judicial Council, on the ground of his or her  incompetence, misconduct, failure to perform his or her duties  honestly, performance of business with mala fide intention or serious  violation by him or her of the code of conduct required to be observed  by him or her;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the Chief Justice on  recommendation of the Judicial Council on the ground that he or she  is unable to discharge his or her duties because of physical or mental  illness;
(e)
In case he or she is convicted and punished by a court for a criminal  offence involving moral turpitude;
(f)
In case he or she dies.
(2) A Judge who is facing a charge shall be provided with a reasonable  opportunity to defend himself or herself prior to removing him or her from the office  pursuant to sub-clause (c) of clause (1). The Judge against whom the proceedings  have been so instituted shall not be allowed to perform the duties of his or her office  until the proceedings are completed.


(3) Nothing shall bar the institution of action in accordance with the federal  law against the Chief Judge or Judge who has been removed from office for an  offence which he or she has committed while in office.
143.
Chief Judge and Judges not to be engaged in any Other Office and Provisions relating  to Transfer: (1) No Chief Judge or Judge of a High Court shall be engaged in or  deputed to any office other than that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Judicial
Council, depute a Judge of the High Court to work concerning judicial inquiry, or to  legal or judicial investigation or research or to any work of national interest for any  specific period.
(2) The Chief Justice may, on recommendation of the Judicial Council,  transfer a Judge of a High Court to another High Court.
144.
Jurisdiction of High Court: (1) The High Court shall have the power to issue  necessary and appropriate orders, for the enforcement of the fundamental rights  conferred by this Constitution or for the enforcement of any other legal right for  which no other remedy has been provided or for which the remedy even though  provided appears to be inadequate or ineffective or for the settlement of any legal  question involved in any dispute of public interest or concern.
(2) For the purposes of clause (1), the High Court may issue appropriate orders  and writs including the writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, certiorari, prohibition and  quo warranto.
Provided that except on the ground of absence of jurisdiction, the High Court  shall not under this clause interfere with any internal proceedings of the Federal
Parliament or Provincial Assembly, and with any proceedings instituted by the Federal
Parliament or Provincial Assembly concerning violation of its privileges and penalties  imposed therefor.
(3) The High Court shall, in accordance with the federal law, have the power  to originally hear and settle cases, hear appeals and test judgments referred for  confirmation.
(4) Other powers and procedures of the High Court shall be as provided for in  the federal law.


145.
Power to Transfer Cases: (1)   In case a High Court is of the opinion that a case which  is sub judice in a subordinate court within its jurisdiction involves a question relating  to a provincial law and it is essential to settle that question in order to decide the case,  the High Court may procure the case and dispose the case wholly or decide only such  question and remand the case to the court of first instance.
(2) In case it is satisfied with the reason that there exists a situation where  judicial impartiality may be questioned if a case filed in a District Court is heard by  that Court, the High Court may, stating the reasons and grounds thereof, order such  case to be transferred from such District Court to another District Court under its  jurisdiction and heard by the latter District Court, as provided for in the federal law.
146.
Allowed to be engaged in Practice of Law: A person who has retired from the office  of a Judge of a High Court may be engaged in the practice of law before the Supreme
Court and a High Court, other than the High Court and subordinate courts where he or  she has served as a Judge.
147.
Responsibility of Chief Judge: The Chief Judge shall have the ultimate responsibility  to make effective the administration of justice by the High Court and the Courts or  other judicial institutions which are subordinate to it. For that purpose, the Chief
Judge may, subject to this Constitution and the federal law, give necessary direction to  the subordinate Courts and judicial institutions
148.
District Court: (1) There shall be a District Court in each District.
(2) The Local Level judicial institutions established in accordance with the  provincial law shall be subordinate to the District Court. The District Court may  inspect as well as supervise and give necessary direction to its subordinate judicial  institutions.
149.
Appointment, Qualification, Remuneration and Other Conditions of Service of Judges  of District Courts: (1) The Chief Justice shall, on recommendation of the Judicial
Council, appoint Judges of the District Courts.
(2) The vacant posts of Judges of the District Court shall be fulfilled as  follows:-
(a)
Twenty percent of the total vacant posts, on the basis of evaluation of  seniority, qualification and competency, from amongst the officers

who have obtained bachelor's degree in law and served for at least  three years in the post of Gazetted Second Class of the Judicial
Service;
(b)
Forty percent of the total vacant posts, on the basis of open  competitive examination, from amongst the officers who have  obtained bachelor's degree in law and served for at least three years in  the post of Gazetted Second Class of the Judicial Service;
(c)
The remaining forty percent of the total vacant posts, on the basis of  open competitive examination, from amongst the citizens of Nepal  who, having obtained bachelor's degree in law, have constantly  practised law for at least eight years as an advocate or who, having  obtained bachelor's degree in law, have served in a Gazetted post of  the Judicial Service for at least eight years or have constantly been  engaged in the teaching or research of law or served in any other field  of law or justice for at least eight years.
(3) The Judicial Service Commission shall, in accordance with the federal law,  hold written and oral competitive examinations for the persons who have possessed  the qualifications referred to in sub-clauses (b) and (c) of clause (2), and make  recommendation, in order of merit, to the Judicial Council for appointment as District
Judges.
(4) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Judges of the
District Court shall be as provided for in the federal law.
(5) The remuneration and other conditions of service of a Judge of the District
Court shall not be altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(6) The office of a Judge of the District Court shall fall vacant in any of the  following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief Justice;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-three years;


(c)
In case he or she is removed from office by the Chief Justice on  recommendation of the Judicial Council, on the ground of his or her  incompetence, misconduct, failure to perform his or her duties  honestly, performance of business with malafide intention or serious  violation by him or her of the code of conduct required to be observed  by him or her;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the Chief Justice on  recommendation of the Judicial Council on the ground that he or she  is unable to continue service and discharge his or her duties because  of physical or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she is convicted and punished by a court for a criminal  offence involving moral turpitude;
(f)
In case he or she dies.
(7) A District Judge who is accused shall be given a reasonable opportunity to  defend himself or herself before removing him or her from office pursuant to sub- clause (c) of clause (6). The District Judge against whom the proceedings are so  initiated shall not perform the duties of his or her office until the proceedings are  completed.
(8) Nothing shall prevent the instituting of an action, in accordance with the  federal law, against a District Judge who is removed from office for the offence which  he or she has committed while in office.
150.
District Judges not to be engaged in any Other Office and Provisions relating to
Transfer: (1) No District Judge shall be engaged in or deputed to any office other than  that of Judge.
Provided that the Government of Nepal may, in consultation with the Judicial
Council, depute a District Judge to work concerning judicial inquiry, or to legal or  judicial investigation or research and to any election related work for a specified  period.
(2) The Chief Justice may, on recommendation of the Judicial Council,  transfer a District Judge from one District Court to another District Court.


151.
Jurisdiction of District Court: (1) Except as otherwise provided for in the federal law,  a District Court shall have the power to initially hear and settle all cases under its  jurisdiction, to hear petitions under law, including petitions of habeas corpus and  injunction, hear appeals under law from decisions made by quasi-judicial institutions,  hear appeals from decisions made by Local Level judicial institutions formed under  the provincial law, institute contempt proceedings and punish for contempt under the  federal law in case anyone makes obstruction in the dispensation of justice by, or  disregards any order or judgment by, it or any of its subordinate courts.
(2) Other provisions relating to the jurisdiction and procedures of the District
Courts shall be as provided for in the federal law.
152.
Specialized Courts: (1) Other specialized courts, judicial institutions or tribunals may  be constituted to initiate and settle specific types and nature of cases other than those  referred to in Article 127, as provided for in the federal law.
Provided that no specialized court, judicial institutions or tribunal shall be  constituted for any specific case.
(2) No criminal offence involving imprisonment for a term of more than one  year shall fall under the jurisdiction of an institution other than a court, specialized  court, military court or judicial institution.
153.
Judicial Council: (1) There shall be a Judicial Council to make recommendation or  give advice, in accordance with this Constitution, on the appointment of, transfer of,  disciplinary action against, and dismissal of, Judges, and other matters relating to the  administration of justice, which shall consist of the following as its chairperson and  members:
(a)
The Chief Justice
- Chairperson
(b) The Federal Minister for Law and Justice
- Member
(c) The senior-most Justice of Supreme Court
- Member
(d) One  jurist  appointed  by  the
President  on  recommendation of the Prime Minister

- Member


(e)
A senior advocate or advocate who has gained at least  twenty years of experience, appointed by the President  on recommendation of the Nepal Bar Association

- Member
(2) The term of office of the members referred to in sub-clauses (d) and (e) of  clause (1) shall be four years, and their remuneration and facilities shall be equivalent  to those of a Justice of the Supreme Court.
(3) The members referred to in sub-clauses (d) and (e) of clause (1) shall be  removed from office in the same manner and on the same grounds as a Justice of the
Supreme Court.
(4) The chairperson and a member of the Judicial Council may study the case  associated with a complaint filed in respect of any Judge, and make a report thereof to  the Judicial Council.
(5) In case a preliminary inquiry of a complaint filed in respect of any Judge  reveals a need to have a detailed inquiry by an expert, the Judicial Council may form  an inquiry committee.
(6) In case a Judge, other than a Judge who may be removed from the office  by way of impeachment in accordance with this Constitution, commits an abuse of  authority by way of corruption, the Judicial Council may investigate into the matter  and institute a case in accordance with law.
(7) The Judicial Council shall be required to prepare updated records of the  persons who are qualified for appointment to offices of the Chief Justice, Justices of  the Supreme Court, Chief Judges and Judges of the High Courts.
(8) Other functions, duties and powers of the Judicial Council shall be as  provided for in the federal law.
154.
Judicial Service Commission: (1)The Government of Nepal shall, in appointing,  transferring or promoting gazetted officers of the Federal Judicial Service or taking  departmental action concerning such officers in accordance with law, act on  recommendation of the Judicial Service Commission.
Provided that the Government of Nepal shall consult the Public Service
Commission for new permanent appointments to gazetted posts of the Federal Judicial


Service from persons who are not already in the Federal Government Service or for  promotions from non-gazetted posts of the Federal Judicial Service to gazetted ones  of that Service.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, the Public Service Commission  shall hold open and internal competitive examinations to be held for appointments to
Gazetted posts of the Federal Judicial Service.
(2) The Judicial Service Commission shall consist of the following as its  chairperson and members:-
(a)
The Chief Justice
- Chairperson
(b)
The Federal Minister for Law and Justice
- Member
(c)
The senior most Justice of Supreme Court
- Member
(d)
The Chairperson of the Public Service
Commission
- Member
(e)
The Attorney General
- Member
(3) Other functions, duties, powers and procedures of the Judicial Service
Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
155.
Provisions relating to Conditions of Service and Facilities: Provisions relating to the  remuneration, facilities and conditions of service of the employees of the Federal
Judicial Service shall be as provided for in a Federal Act.
156.
Provisions relating to Provincial Judicial Service Commission: Provisions relating to  the formation of a Provincial Judicial Service Commission and the remuneration,  facilities and conditions of service of the employees of a Provincial Judicial Service  shall be as provided for in the federal law.


Part-12
Attorney General
157.
Attorney General:  (1) There shall be an Attorney General of Nepal.
(2) The President shall, on recommendation of the Prime Minister, appoint the
Attorney General.  The Attorney General shall hold his or her office during the  pleasure of the Prime Minister.
(3) A person who is eligible   to be appointed as a Justice of the Supreme
Court shall be eligible to be appointed as the Attorney General.
(4) The office of the Attorney General shall fall vacant in any of the following  circumstances:
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President  through the Prime Minister;
(b)
In case he or she is relieved of the office by the President on  recommendation of the Prime Minister;
(c)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The remuneration and other facilities of the Attorney General shall be  similar to those of a Justice of Supreme Court. Other conditions of service of the
Attorney General shall be in accordance with law.
158.
Functions, Duties and Powers of Attorney General:  (1) The Attorney General shall be  the chief legal advisor to the Government of Nepal. It shall be the duty of the
Attorney General to give opinions and advices on constitutional and legal matters to  the Government of Nepal and such other authorities as the Government of Nepal may  specify.
(2) The Attorney General or government attorneys subordinate to him or her  shall represent the Government of Nepal in lawsuits wherein the rights, interests or  concerns of the Government of Nepal are involved. Except as provided otherwise in  this Constitution, the Attorney General shall have the right to make a final decision as  to whether or not to institute any case on behalf of the Government of Nepal in any  court, judicial institution or authority.


(3) Opinion of the Attorney General shall be required for withdrawing a case  filed on behalf of the Government of Nepal.
(4) The Attorney General may, upon invitation by the Federal Parliament or  any of its committees, appear and express his or her opinion on any legal question in  such meeting.
(5) In the course of discharging the duties of his or her office, the Attorney
General shall have the right to appear in any Court, office and authority of Nepal.
(6) The Attorney General shall, in the course of performing his or her duties,  in addition to that set forth in clause (2) have the power to carry out the following  acts:-
(a)
To defend, on behalf of the Government of Nepal, any lawsuit in  which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or a defendant;
(b)
To monitor, or cause to be monitored, whether any interpretation  given to a law or any legal principle laid down by the Supreme Court  in the course of hearing of lawsuits has been implemented;
(c)
In case a complaint is made alleging that any person held in custody  has not been treated humanely subject to this Constitution or such  person has not been allowed to meet his or her relative or through his  or her legal practitioner or in case information of such matter is  received, to inquire there into and give necessary directive to the  concerned authority to prevent such act.
(7) The Attorney General may so delegate his or her functions, duties and  powers referred to in this Article to his or her subordinate government attorneys as to  be exercised and complied with subject to the specified conditions.
(8) In addition to the functions, duties and powers referred to in this Article,  other functions, duties and powers of the Attorney General shall be in accordance  with this Constitution and the federal law.
159.
Annual Report: (1) The Attorney General shall, every year, submit to the President an  annual report on the works which he or she has performed in accordance with this
Constitution and the federal law, and the President shall cause such report to be laid  before the Federal Parliament through the Prime Minister.


(2) The annual report to be submitted pursuant to clause (1) shall set out, inter  alia, the number of advices and opinions on constitutional and legal matters rendered  by him or her throughout the year, along with short description of such advices and  opinions, details of cases instituted as State cases, details of defence made in lawsuits  in which the Government of Nepal is a plaintiff or defendant, details of reforms to be  made in the future in relation to cases to be instituted as State cases and information  relating to crime trends.
160.
Chief Attorney: (1) There shall be a Chief Attorney in every Province, who shall be  subordinate to the Attorney General.
(2) The Chief of Province shall, on recommendation of the concerned Chief
Minister, appoint the Chief Attorney. The Chief Attorney shall hold office during the  pleasure of the Chief Minister.
(3) A person who is qualified to be appointed as a Judge of High Court shall  be eligible to be appointed as the Chief Attorney.
(4) The office of the Chief Attorney shall fall vacant in any of the following  circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief of
Province through the Chief Minister;
(b)
In case he or she is removed from office by the Chief of Province on  recommendation of the Chief Minister;
(c)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Chief Attorney shall be the chief legal advisor to the Provincial
Government. It shall be the duty of the Chief Attorney to give opinions and advices  on constitutional and legal matters to the Provincial Government and such other  authorities as the Provincial Government may specify.
(6) The Office of Attorney General shall manage the employees under the
Office of Chief Attorney.
(7) The remuneration and other facilities of the Chief Attorney shall be similar  to those of a Judge of High Court. The functions, duties and powers and other  conditions of service of the Chief Attorney shall be as provided for in the provincial  law.


161.
Provisions relating to Conditions of Service and Facilities: Provisions relating to the  remuneration, facilities and conditions of service of the government attorneys and  other employees under the Attorney General shall be as provided for in a Federal Act.


Part-13
Provincial Executive
162.
Executive Power of Province: (1) The executive power of a Province shall, in  accordance with this Constitution and provincial law, be vested in the Provincial
Council of Ministers.
Provided that in case a Provincial Executive does not exist because of  enforcement of Federal rule, the Chief of Province shall exercise the executive power  of the Province as directed by the Government of Nepal.
(2) The responsibility for issuing general directives, controlling and regulating  the governance of the Province shall, subject to this Constitution and other laws, lie in  the Provincial Council of Ministers.
(3) All Provincial Executive functions shall be performed in the name of the
Provincial Government.
(4) The executive power of the Province shall be as referred to in Schedule-6,
Schedule-7 and Schedule-9 subject to this Constitution.
Provided that the Provincial Council of Ministers shall exercise the executive  powers in coordination with the Government of Nepal, except as explicitly provided  for in this Constitution and in the federal law in relation to concurrent powers of the
Federation and the Province.
(5) Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the Provincial
Government pursuant to clause (3) and other instruments of authorization pertaining  thereto shall be authenticated as provided for in the provincial law.
163.
Provisions relating to Chief of Province: (1) There shall be a Chief of Province in  each Province as a representative of the Government of Nepal.
(2) The President shall appoint one Chief of Province for each Province.
(3) The term of office of a Chief of Province shall be five years except where  the President removes him or her from the office prior to the expiration of his or her  term of office.


(4) The same person may not be the Chief of Province for more than once in  the same Province.
164.
Qualification for Chief of Province: A person who has the following qualification  shall be eligible to become the Chief of Province:-
(a)
One who is eligible to become a member of the Federal Parliament;
(b)
One who has completed the age of thirty-five years; and
(c)
One who is not disqualified by any law.
165.
Vacation of Office of Chief of Province: (1) The office of the Chief of Province shall  fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case his or her term of office expires or he or she is removed from  office by the President prior to expiration of the term;
(c)
In case he or she dies.
(2) In case the office of the Chief of Province of any Province falls vacant, the
President may so designate the Chief of Province of another Province to act as such  also for such Province.
166.
Functions, Duties and Powers of Chief of Province: (1) The Chief of Province shall  exercise such powers and perform such duties as conferred to him or her in  accordance with this Constitution or law.
(2) In exercising the powers or fulfilling the duties pursuant to clause (1), the
Chief of Province shall perform all other functions to be performed by him or her on  recommendation and with the consent of the Provincial Council of Ministers than  those functions specifically provided to be performed on recommendation of any  institution or official in accordance with this Constitution or law. Such  recommendation and consent shall be submitted through the Chief Minister.
(3) Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the Chief of Province  pursuant to clause (2) and other instrument of authorization pertaining thereto shall be  authenticated as provided for in the provincial law.
167.
Oath by Chief of Province: The Chief of Province shall, prior to assuming office, take  an oath of office and secrecy before the President as provided for in the federal law.


168.
Constitution of Provincial Council of Ministers: (1) The Chief of Province shall  appoint the leader of the parliamentary party commanding a majority in the Provincial
Assembly as the Chief Minister and the Provincial   Council of Ministers shall be  constituted under his or her chairpersonship.
(2) In cases where no party has a clear majority in the Provincial Assembly  pursuant to clause (1), the Chief of Province shall appoint as the Chief Minister a  member of the Provincial Assembly who is able to command majority with the  support of two or more parties representing to the Provincial Assembly.
(3) In cases where the Chief Minister cannot be appointed pursuant to clause
(2) within thirty days after the date of declaration of the final results of election to the
Provincial Assembly the Chief Minister so appointed fails to secure a vote of  confidence pursuant to clause (4), the Chief of Province shall appoint as the Chief
Minister the parliamentary party leader of the party which has the highest number of  members in the Provincial Assembly.
(4) The Chief Minister appointed pursuant to clause (2) or (3) shall secure a  vote of confidence from the Provincial Assembly within thirty days after the date of  such appointment.
(5) In cases where the Chief Minister appointed pursuant to clause (3) fails to  secure a vote of confidence under clause (4) and any member referred to in clause (2)  presents a ground on which he or she is able to secure a vote of confidence in the
Provincial Assembly, the Chief of Province shall appoint such member as the Chief
Minister.
(6) The Chief Minister appointed pursuant to clause (5) shall secure a vote of  confidence pursuant to clause (4).
(7) In cases where the Chief Minister appointed pursuant to clause (5) fails to  secure a vote of confidence or the Chief Minister cannot be appointed, the Chief of
Province shall, on recommendation of the Chief Minister, dissolve the Provincial
Assembly and appoint a date of election so that the election to another Provincial
Assembly is completed within six months.
(8) Procedures on the appointment of the Chief Minister pursuant to this
Article shall be required to be completed within thirty-five days after the date of  declaration of the final results of election to the Provincial Assembly held in

accordance with this Constitution or the date on which the office of the Chief Minister  has fallen vacant.
(9) The Chief of Province shall, on recommendation of the Chief Minister,  constitute the Provincial Council of Ministers consisting of a maximum of twenty  percent of the total number of members of the Provincial Assembly, including the
Chief Minister, in accordance with the inclusive principle, from amongst the members  of the Provincial Assembly.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Minister" means a Minister,
Minister of State and Assistant Minister.
(10) The Chief Minister and Ministers shall be collectively responsible to
Provincial Assembly, and the Ministers shall be individually responsible for the  business of their respective Ministries to the Chief Minister and the Provincial
Assembly.
169.
Vacation of Office of Chief Minister and Minister: (1) The office of the Chief
Minister shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief of
Province;
(b)
In case a vote of no confidence is adopted against him or her or a vote  of confidence is not adopted pursuant to Article 188;
(c)
In case he or she ceases to be a member of the Provincial Assembly;
(d)
In case he or she dies.
(2) The office of a Minister shall fall vacant in any of the following  circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Chief Minister;
(b)
In case the Chief Minister removes him or her from the office;
(c)
In case the office of the Chief Minister falls vacant pursuant to sub- clause (a), (b) or (c) of clause (1);
(d)
In case he or she dies.


(3) Even though the office of the Chief Minister falls vacant pursuant to clause
(1), the same Council of Ministers shall continue to act until another Provincial
Council of Ministers is constituted.
Provided that in case the Chief Minister dies, the senior-most Minister shall  act as the Chief Minister until a new Chief Minister is appointed.
170.
Non-Member of Provincial Assembly may Become Minister: (1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in clause (9) of Article 168, the Chief of Province may, on the  recommendation of the Chief Minister, appoint any person who is not a member of  the Provincial Assembly as a Minister.
(2) A Minister appointed pursuant to clause (1) shall be required to become a  member of the Provincial Assembly within six months from the date of taking an oath  by him or her.
(3) In the event of failure to become a member of the Provincial Assembly  within the period referred to in clause (2), he or she shall not be eligible to be  reappointed to the office of Minister during the term of the then Provincial Assembly.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), a person who has lost  the election to the then Provincial Assembly shall not be eligible to be appointed to  the office of Minister pursuant to clause (1) during the term of such Provincial
Assembly.
171.
Remuneration and other Facilities of Chief Minister and Minister: The remuneration  and other facilities of the Chief Minister and Ministers shall be as provided for in a  provincial Act, and until such Act is made, shall be as specified by the Provincial
Government.
172.
Oath: The Chief Minister and Ministers shall, before assuming their respective  offices, take an oath of office and secrecy before the Chief of Province, and Ministers  of State and Assistant Ministers, before the Chief Minister, as provided for in the  provincial law.
173.
To Give Information to Chief of Province: The Chief Minister shall inform the Chief  of Province about the following matters:-
(a)
Resolutions of the Provincial Council of Ministers;
(b)
Bills to be introduced in the Provincial Assembly;


(c)
Such other necessary information as commanded by the Chief of
Province on matters set forth in clauses (a) and (b); and
(d)
Current general state of affairs of the Province.
174.
Transaction of Business of Provincial Government: (1) The allocation and transaction  of business of the Provincial Government shall be carried out in accordance with the  rules approved by the Provincial Government.
(2) No question shall be raised in any court as to whether or not the rules  referred to in clause (1) have been observed.


Part-14
Provincial Legislature
175.
Provincial Legislature: The legislature of a Province shall be unicameral which shall  be called as the Provincial Assembly.
176.
Composition of Provincial Assembly: (1) Each Provincial Assembly shall consist of a  number of members as follows:-
(a)
Members in a number that is twice as many as the number of  members elected to the House of Representatives from the concerned
Province, through the first past the post electoral system;
(b)
The number of members to be set pursuant to clause (a) shall be  considered to be sixty percent, and the rest forty percent members to  be elected, through the proportional electoral system.
(2) Election constituencies shall be set on the basis of geography and  population as provided for in the federal law for the election to members pursuant to  sub-clause (a) of clause (1).
(3) Sixty percent members of the Provincial Assembly shall be elected in  accordance with the first past the post electoral system and the forty percent members  in accordance with the proportional electoral system.
(4) Election to the members of the Provincial Assembly pursuant to clause (3)  shall be held through adult suffrage by secret ballots in accordance with law.
(5) Each citizen of Nepal who resides within the territory of the Province and  who has completed the age of eighteen years shall have a right to vote in any one  election constituency in accordance with law.
(6) A federal law shall provide that in filing candidacy by political parties for  the election to the Provincial Assembly under the proportional electoral system,  representation shall be ensured on the basis of a closed list also from women, Dalit,  indigenous nationalities (Aadibasi Janajati), Khas Arya, Madhesi, Tharu, Muslims  and backward regions, minority communities, on the basis of population. In so filing

candidacy, regard shall also be had to geographical balance of the concerned
Province.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "Khas Arya" means Kshetri,
Brahmin, Thakuri, Sanyasi (Dashnami) community.
(7) In filing candidacy pursuant to clause (6), political parties shall provide for  representation of the persons with disabilities as well.
(8) In case the seat of a member of the Provincial Assembly falls vacant while  its term still remains for more than six months, the vacancy shall be fulfilled through  the same electoral system as through which such seat was fulfilled.
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Article, at least one  third of the total number of members elected from each political party representing in  the Provincial Assembly shall be women. In case women are not so elected as to  constitute one third of the elected members of any political party pursuant to sub- clause (a) of clause (1), such political party shall, in electing members pursuant to  sub-clause (b) of that clause, so elect that women members constitute at least one  third of the total number of members elected to the Provincial Assembly from that  party.
(10) A person who is qualified pursuant to Article 178 and entitled to vote in  an election to the members of the Provincial Assembly may, subject to law, be a  candidate in any election constituency of the Province.
Provided that a person shall not be a candidate in more than one election  constituencies at the same time.
(11) Other provisions relating to election to the Provincial Assembly shall be  as provided for in the federal law.
177.
Term of Provincial Assembly: (1) Unless dissolved earlier in accordance with this
Constitution, the term of the Provincial Assembly shall be five years.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), the term of the
Provincial Assembly may be extended by a provincial Act for a period not exceeding  one year in cases where a proclamation or order of a state of emergency is in effect.


(3) The term of the Provincial Assembly extended pursuant to clause (2) shall,  ipso facto, be terminated after the expiry of six months from the date of revocation of  the proclamation or order of the state of emergency in the concerned Province.
178.
Qualification for a Member of Provincial Assembly: (1) A person who has the  following qualifications shall be eligible to become a member of the Provincial
Assembly:-
(a)
One who is a citizen of Nepal;
(b)
One who is a voter of the concerned Province;
(c)
One who has completed the age of twenty-five years;
(d)
One who is not convicted of a criminal offense involving moral  turpitude;
(e)
One who is not disqualified by any law; and
(f)
One who is not holding any office of profit.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause, "office of profit" means any  position, other than a political position which is to be fulfilled by election or  nomination, for which a remuneration or financial benefit is paid out of a government  fund.
(2) In case a person who holds a political office to be fulfilled by way of  election, nomination or appointment is elected as a member of the Provincial
Assembly under this Part, such office shall, ipso facto, fall vacant with effect from the  day on which he or she takes an oath of such office.
179.
Oath of Member of Provincial Assembly: Every member of the Provincial Assembly  shall be required, before taking part for the first time in the meeting of the Assembly  or any of its committees, to take an oath as provided for in the provincial law.
180.
Vacation of Seat of a Member of Provincial Assembly: The seat of a member of the
Provincial Assembly shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Speaker of
Province;
(b)
In case he or she is no longer qualified or ceases to possess the  qualifications referred to in Article 178;


(c)
In case the term of the Provincial Assembly expires or it is dissolved;
(d)
In case he or she is absent in ten consecutive meetings without giving  information to the Provincial Assembly;
(e)
In case the political party of which he or she was a member when elected  provides a notification as provided for in the federal law that he or she  has defected from the party;
(f)
In case he or she dies.
181.
Decision as to Disqualification of Member: In case question arises as to whether any  member of the Provincial Assembly is disqualified or has ceased to possess any of the  qualifications referred to in Article 178, the Constitutional Bench of the Supreme
Court shall make the final decision of such question.
182.
Speaker and Deputy Speaker of Provincial Assembly: (1) The members of the
Provincial Assembly shall, within fifteen days of the date of holding of the first  meeting of the Provincial Assembly, elect a Speaker of Province and a Deputy
Speaker of Province from amongst themselves.
(2) Election pursuant to clause (1) shall be so held that there is one woman out  of the Speaker of Province and the Deputy Speaker of Province, and the Speaker of
Province and the Deputy Speaker of Province shall be representatives from different  parties.
Provided that in case there is no representation of more than one party in the
Provincial Assembly or no candidacy is filed by more than one party despite  representation, nothing shall prevent the members of the same party from being the
Speaker of Province and the Deputy Speaker of Province.
(3) In case the office of the Speaker of Province or the Deputy Speaker of
Province falls vacant, the members of the Provincial Assembly shall fulfil the vacancy  through election to the Speaker of Province or the Deputy Speaker of Province from  amongst themselves.
(4) The Deputy Speaker of Province shall, in the absence of the Speaker of
Province, preside over the Provincial Assembly.
(5) In case the election to the Speaker of Province and the Deputy Speaker of
Province has not taken place, or in case both the positions have fallen vacant, the

attending member who is by age the senior-most shall preside over the meeting of the
Provincial Assembly.
(6) The office of the Speaker of Province or the Deputy Speaker of Province  shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she ceases to be a member of the Provincial Assembly;

Provided that, in the event of the dissolution of the Provincial
Assembly, the Speaker of Province and the Deputy Speaker holding  their respective offices shall continue in office until the previous day  of the filing of nominations for another election to the Provincial
Assembly;
(b)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing;
(c)
In case a resolution is adopted by a majority of two-thirds of the total  number of the then members of the Provincial Assembly to the effect  that his or her conduct is not compatible with his or her office.
(7) The Deputy Speaker of Province shall preside over a meeting at which  deliberations are to be held on a motion that the conduct of the Speaker of Province is  not compatible with his or her office. The Speaker of Province shall be entitled to take  part and vote in the deliberations on such motion.
183.
Summoning and Prorogation of Session of Provincial Assembly: (1) The Chief of
Province shall summon a session of the Provincial Assembly within twenty days of  the declaration of final results of the election to the Provincial Assembly. Thereafter,  the Chief of Province shall, from time to time, summon other sessions in accordance  with this Constitution.
Provided that the interval between the two consecutive sessions shall not  exceed six months.
(2) The Chief of Province may prorogue the sessions of the Provincial
Assembly.
(3) In case, during the prorogation or recess of the session of the Provincial
Assembly, one-fourth of the total number of its members make a requisition in writing  that it is expedient to convene a session or meeting, the Chief of Province shall

specify the date and time for such session or meeting. The Provincial Assembly shall  meet or commence its session at the date and time so specified.
184.
Address by Chief of Province: (1) The Chief of Province may address a sitting of the
Provincial Assembly and summon the members for that purpose.
(2) The Chief of Province shall address the first session after an election to the
Provincial Assembly and a sitting of the Provincial Assembly after the  commencement of the first session of each year.
185.
Quorum of Provincial Assembly: Except as otherwise provided for in this
Constitution, no question or motion shall be submitted for a decision in the Provincial
Assembly unless one-fourth of the total number of its members are present.
186.
Voting in Provincial Assembly: All questions submitted for a decision in the
Provincial Assembly shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present and  participate in voting. The member presiding over the meeting shall not have the right  to vote.
Provided that he or she may exercise his or her casting vote in the case of a tie.
187.
Privileges of Provincial Assembly: (1) Subject to this Constitution, there shall be full  freedom of speech in the Provincial Assembly and no member shall be arrested,  detained or prosecuted in any court for anything expressed or any vote cast by him or  her in the Provincial Assembly.
(2) Subject to this Constitution, the Provincial Assembly shall have full power  to regulate and decide its internal business and it shall be the exclusive right of the
Provincial Assembly to decide whether or not any of its proceedings is regular or  irregular. No question shall be raised in any court in this regard.
(3) No comment shall be made about the good faith concerning any  proceeding of the Provincial Assembly, and no publication and broadcasting of any  type shall be made about anything said by any member, intentionally distorting or  misinterpreting the meaning of the speech.
(4) The provisions of clauses (1) and (3) shall also apply to other persons who  are entitled to participate in the meetings of the Provincial Assembly other than the  members of the Provincial Assembly.


(5) No proceedings shall be initiated in any court against any person in respect  of the publication, under the authority granted by the Provincial Assembly, of any  document, report, vote or proceeding.
Explanation: For the purposes of this clause and clauses (1), (2), (3) and (4),
"Provincial Assembly" means and includes a meeting of a committee of the Provincial
Assembly.
(6) No member of the Provincial Assembly may be arrested during the period  from the issuance of a notice summoning the session to its prorogation.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to prevent the arrest under  the law of any member on a criminal charge. In case any member is so arrested, the  authority making such arrest shall forthwith give information thereof to the person  presiding over the Provincial Assembly.
(7) Any breach of the privileges shall be deemed to constitute the contempt of  the Provincial Assembly, and the Provincial Assembly shall have the exclusive right  to decide whether or not any breach of its privileges has taken place.
(8) In case any person is in contempt of the Provincial Assembly, the person  presiding over the Provincial Assembly may, after a decision by the Provincial
Assembly to that effect, admonish, warn or impose a sentence of imprisonment for a  term not exceeding three months or of a fine not exceeding ten thousand rupees on  such person, and such fine shall be recovered as a government due.
Provided that in case such person apologies to the satisfaction of the
Provincial Assembly, it may either pardon him or her or remit or commute the  sentence imposed on him or her.
(9) Other matters relating to privileges of the Provincial Assembly shall be as  provided for in a provincial law.
188.
Provisions relating to Vote of Confidence and Motion of No confidence: (1) The
Chief Minister may, whenever he or she considers necessary or appropriate to show  that he or she has confidence from the Provincial Assembly, table a resolution to that  effect in the Provincial Assembly for the vote of confidence.
(2) In case the political party which the Chief Minister represents is divided or  a political party in coalition Provincial Government withdraws its support, the Chief


Minister shall table a resolution in the Provincial Assembly for a vote of confidence  within thirty days.
(3) In case a resolution tabled pursuant to clauses (1) and (2) is not adopted by  a majority of the total number of then members of the Provincial Assembly, the Chief
Minister shall relieve of his or her office.
(4) One-fourth of the total number of then members of the Provincial
Assembly may table in writing a motion of no confidence against the Chief Minister.
Provided that a motion of no confidence may not be tabled until the first two  years after the appointment of the Chief Minister and until another one year after the  date of failure of the motion of no confidence once tabled.
(5) A motion of no confidence to be tabled pursuant to clause (4) shall also  mention the name of a member proposed for the Chief Minister.
(6) In case a motion of no confidence tabled pursuant to clause (4) is adopted  by a majority of the total number of then members of the Provincial Assembly, the
Chief Minister shall be relieved of his or her office.
(7) In case the office of the Chief Minister falls vacant because of the adoption  of a vote of no confidence pursuant to clause (6), the Chief of Province shall, pursuant  to Article 168, appoint as the Chief Minister the member of the Provincial Assembly  proposed pursuant to clause (5).
189.
Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister entitled to Take part in Meetings of
Provincial Assembly: The Minister, Minister of State and Assistant Minister shall be  entitled to attend, and take part in the proceedings and deliberations of, the Provincial
Assembly or its committees.
Provided that a Minister, Minister of State or Assistant Minister who is not a  member of the Provincial Assembly shall not be entitled to cast a vote in a meeting of  the Provincial Assembly or its committee, and a Minister, Minister of State or
Assistant Minister shall not be entitled to vote in a meeting of a committee of which  he or she is not a member.
190.
Penalty for unauthorized Presence or Voting in Provincial Assembly: In case a person  who has not taken oath pursuant to Article 179 or who is not a member of the
Provincial Assembly is present or votes in a meeting of the Provincial Assembly or of

its committee as a member, the person shall, by order of the person presiding over the  meeting, be fined with a sum of five thousand rupees for each instance of such  presence or voting, and such fine shall be recovered as a government due.
191.
Restriction on Discussion: No discussion shall be held in the Provincial Assembly on  any matters that may cause adverse effect on the dispensation of justice on any cases  which are sub judice in any court of Nepal and on any judicial acts carried out by
Judges in the course of performance of their duties.
192.
Transaction of Business in Case of Vacancy in Seat of Member: The Provincial
Assembly shall have the power to transact its business notwithstanding any vacancy  in the seat of its member; and no proceedings of the Provincial Assembly already  conducted shall become invalid even in case it is subsequently discovered that a  person who was not so entitled took part in such proceedings.
193.
Power of Provincial Assembly to Constitute Committees: The Provincial Assembly  may, in accordance with its rules, constitute committees or special committees, as  required, in order to manage its working procedures.
194.
Procedures relating to Conduct of Business of Provincial Assembly: The Provincial
Assembly shall frame rules to conduct its business, maintain order during its meetings  and regulate the constitution, functions and procedures of, and other matters relating  to, its committees. Until such rules are framed, the Provincial Assembly shall regulate  its procedures on its own.
195.
Secretary and Secretariat of Provincial Assembly: (1) The Chief of Province shall  appoint the Secretary of the Provincial Assembly on recommendation of the Speaker  of Province.


(2) There shall be a Secretariat for conducting and managing the business of  the Provincial Assembly. The establishment of such Secretariat and other matters  related thereto shall be as provided for in the provincial law.
(3) The qualification, functions, duties, powers and other conditions of service  of the Secretary of the Provincial Assembly shall be as provided for in the   provincial  law.


196.
Remuneration: The remuneration and facilities of the Speaker, Deputy Speaker and  members of the Provincial Assembly shall be as provided for in the provincial law,  and until such law is made, as specified by the Provincial Government.


Part-15
Provincial Legislative Procedures
197.
Legislative Powers of Provincial Assembly: The legislative powers of the Provincial
Assembly shall be as enumerated in lists of Schedule-6, Schedule-7 and Schedule-9.
198.
Procedures for Introduction of Bills in Provincial Assembly:  (1) A Bill may, subject  to this Constitution, be introduced in the Provincial Assembly.
(2) A Money Bill and a Bill concerning law and order may be introduced only  as a Government Bill.
(3) "Money Bill" means a Bill concerning any or all of the following subjects:-
(a)
Matters concerning imposition, collection, abolition, remission,  alteration or regulation of taxes in the Province;
(b)
Matters concerning preservation of the Provincial Consolidated Fund  or any other Provincial Government Fund, the deposit of moneys into  and the appropriation or the withdrawal of moneys from such Funds,  or the reduction, increment or cancellation of appropriations of  proposed expenditures from such Funds;
(c)
Regulation of matters relating to the borrowing of money or the  guarantee to be given by the Provincial Government, or any matter  pertaining to the amendment of the law with respect to any financial  obligations undertaken or to be undertaken by the Provincial
Government,
(d)
Matters concerning custody of all revenues received by Provincial
Government Fund, moneys acquired through the repayment of loans,  and grant moneys, investments to be made or account or audits of the  accounts of the Provincial Government, or
(e)
Other incidental matters directly related to any of the subjects  specified in clause (a), (b), (c) or (d).


Provided that any Bill shall not be deemed to be a Money Bill only by the  reason that it provides for the levying of any charges, fees or tariff such as license fee,  application fee, renewal fee or for the imposition of fines or penalty of imprisonment.
(4) In case any question arises as to whether or not a Bill is a Money Bill, the  decision of the Speaker of Provincial Assembly shall be final.
199.
Procedures for Adoption of Bills: (1) A Bill adopted by the Provincial Assembly shall  be submitted to the Chief of Province for authentication.
(2) In case a session of the Provincial Assembly is prorogued while a Bill is  under consideration, deliberations on the Bill may continue at the succeeding session.
Provided that in case the Provincial Assembly is dissolved or its term expires  when any Bill is under its consideration, such Bill shall lapse.
200.
Withdrawal of Bills:  A Bill may be withdrawn by the member introducing it with the  approval of the Provincial Assembly.
201.
Authentication on Bills: (1) The Bill to be presented to the Chief of Province for  authentication pursuant to Article 199 shall be certified by the Speaker of Provincial
Assembly and so presented.
Provided that in the case of a Money Bill, the Speaker of Province shall so  certify.
(2) A Bill presented to the Chief of Province for the authentication shall be  authenticated within fifteen days, and the Provincial Assembly shall be informed  thereof as soon as possible.
(3) Except for a Money Bill, in case the Chief of Province is of the opinion  that any Bill needs further deliberations, he or she may send back the Bill along with  his or her message to the Provincial Assembly within fifteen days from the date of  presentation of the Bill to him or her.
(4) In case any Bill is sent back along with his or her message by the Chief of
Province pursuant to clause (3), it shall be reconsidered by the Provincial Assembly  and in case the Bill so reconsidered is again adopted as it was or with amendments,  and is again submitted to him or her, the Chief of Province shall authenticate that Bill  within fifteen days of such submission.


(5) A Bill shall become an Act after the Chief of Province authenticates it.
202.
Ordinance: (1) In case, at any time, except when the Provincial Assembly is in  session, a circumstance exists which renders it necessary to take immediate action, the
Chief of Province may, on the recommendation of the Provincial Council of
Ministers, promulgate an Ordinance.
(2) An Ordinance promulgated pursuant to clause (1) shall have the same force  and effect as an Act.
Provided that every such Ordinance,-
(a)
Shall be tabled at the session of the Provincial Assembly held after  the promulgation, and in case not adopted by the Provincial
Assembly, it shall ipso facto cease to be effective;
(b)
May be repealed at any time by the Chief of Province; and
(c)
Shall, unless rendered ineffective or repealed pursuant to sub-clause
(a) or (b), ipso facto cease to be effective at the expiration of sixty  days after the day on which a meeting of the Provincial Assembly is  held.


Part-16
Province Financial Procedures
203.
No Tax to be levied or Loan to be raised:  (1) No tax shall be levied and collected in a
Province except in accordance with law.
(2) No loan shall be raised and guarantee be given by the Provincial
Government except as provided for in the federal law.
204.
Provincial Consolidated Fund: Except for the revenues of trusts (Guthi), all revenues  received by the Provincial Government, all loans raised on the security of revenues,  all moneys received in repayment of any loans made under the authority of any  provincial Act and any amounts of grants or loans received from the Government of
Nepal shall, except as otherwise provided for in the provincial Act, be credited to a
Provincial Government Fund to be known as the Provincial Consolidated Fund.
205.
Expenditures from Provincial Consolidated Fund or Provincial Government Fund: No  expenditure shall be incurred out of the Provincial Consolidated Fund or any other
Provincial Government Fund except the following:-
(a)
Moneys charged on the Provincial Consolidated Fund;
(b)
Moneys required to meet the expenditure under an Appropriation Act;
(c)
Advance moneys authorized by an Act required to meet expenditures,  when an Appropriation Bill is under consideration; or
(d)
Expenditures to be incurred in extraordinary circumstances under a
Vote of Credit Act which contains only a description of expenditures.
Provided that matters relating to the Provincial Contingency Fund shall  be pursuant to Article 212.
206.
Expenditures Chargeable on Province Consolidated Fund:  The expenditures relating  to the following matters shall be charged on the Provincial Consolidated Fund, and  approval of the Provincial Assembly shall not be required for such expenditures:-
(a)
The amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
Speaker of Province and the Deputy Speaker of Province;


(b)
The amount required as remuneration and facilities payable to the
Chairperson and members of the Provincial Public Service
Commission;
(c)
All charges relating to debts to which the Provincial Government is  liable;
(d)
Any sum required to satisfy any judgment or decree made by a court  against the Provincial Government; and
(e)
Any other sum specified by the provincial law to be chargeable on the
Province Consolidated Fund.
207.
Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures: (1) The Provincial Minister for Finance  shall, in respect of every fiscal year, lay before the Provincial Assembly an annual  estimate setting out, inter alia, the following matters:-
(a)
An estimate of revenues;
(b)
The moneys required to meet the charges on the Provincial
Consolidated Fund; and
(c)
The moneys required to meet the expenditure to be provided for by a
Provincial Appropriation Act.
(2) The annual estimate to be laid pursuant to clause (1) shall also be  accompanied by a statement of the expenses allocated to every Ministry in the  previous fiscal year and particulars of whether or not the objectives of the expenses  have been achieved.
208.
Provincial Appropriation Act: The moneys required to meet the expenditure to be  provided for by the Provincial Appropriation Act shall be specified under appropriate  heads in an Appropriation Bill.
209.
Supplementary Estimates: (1) The Provincial Minister for Finance may lay before the
Provincial Assembly a supplementary estimate in case it is found in any fiscal year,-
(a)
That the sum authorized to be spent for a particular service by the
Provincial Appropriation Act for the current financial year is  insufficient, or that a need has arisen for expenditures upon some new

service not provided for in the Provincial Appropriation Act for that  year; or
(b)
That the expenditures made during that fiscal year are in excess of the  amount authorized by the Provincial Appropriation Act.
(2) The sums included in the supplementary estimates shall be specified under  the heads in a Supplementary Appropriation Bill.
210.
Votes on Account: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, a  portion of the expenditure estimated for the fiscal year may, when a Provincial
Appropriation Bill is under consideration, be incurred in advance in accordance with a
Province Act.
(2) No Vote on Account Bill shall be introduced until the estimates of revenues  and expenditures have been laid pursuant to Article 207, and the sums involved in the
Vote on Account shall not exceed one-third of the estimate of expenditures for the  fiscal year.
(3) The expenditures incurred in accordance with the Provincial Vote on
Account Act shall be included in the Provincial Appropriation Bill.
211.
Votes of Credit: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part, in case  owing to an emergency due to natural cause or other reasons, it appears to be  impractical or inexpedient in view of the security or interest of the Province to specify  the details required pursuant to clause (1) of Article 207, the Provincial Minister for
Finance may lay before the Provincial Assembly a Vote of Credit Bill giving only a  statement of expenditures.
212.
Provincial Contingency Fund: (1) A provincial Act may create a Fund to be known as  the Provincial Contingency Fund into which shall be paid from time to time such  moneys as may be determined by a provincial Act.
(2) The Fund referred to in clause (1) shall be under the control of the
Provincial Government. Any unforeseen expenditure may be met out of such Fund by  the Provincial Government.
(3) The amount of the expenditure referred to in clause (2) shall be  reimbursed as soon as possible by a provincial Act.


213.
Act relating to Financial Procedures: Matters relating to the transfer of moneys  appropriated by a provincial Act from one head to another and other financial  procedures shall be as provided for in the provincial Act.


Part-17
Local Executive
214.
Executive Power of Local Level: (1) The executive power of the Local Level shall, in  accordance with this Constitution and the federal law, be vested in the Rural
Municipal Executive or the Municipal Executive.
(2) The local executive power shall be as referred to in Schedule-8 and
Schedule-9.
(3) The responsibility for issuing general directives, controlling and regulating  the governance of the Rural Municipality and the Municipality shall, subject to this
Constitution and other laws, lie in the Rural Municipal Executive and the Municipal
Executive.
(4) The executive functions of the Rural Municipality and the Municipality  shall be performed in the name of the Rural Municipal Executive and the Municipal
Executive.
(5) Any decision or order to be issued in the name of the Rural Municipal
Executive and the Municipal Executive pursuant to clause (4) and other instruments  of authorization pertaining thereto shall be authenticated as provided for in the Local  law.
215.
Provisions relating to Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Rural Municipal
Executive: (1) There shall be a Chairperson of Rural Municipal Executive in each
Rural Municipality. The Rural Municipal Executive shall be formed under his or her  chairpersonship.


(2) The Rural Municipal Executive referred to in clause (1) shall consist of one
Vice-Chairperson, Ward Chairperson elected from each Ward and members elected  pursuant to clause (4).
(3) The Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson shall be elected by the voters  residing within the concerned Rural Municipality area by secret ballots on the basis of  one person one vote, in accordance with the first past the post electoral system.


Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Chairperson" and "Vice-Chairperson"  mean the Chairperson and the Vice-Chairperson of the Rural Municipal Executive.
(4) The members of the Rural Municipal Executive shall also include four  women members elected by the members of the Rural Municipal Assembly from  amongst themselves and two members elected by the Rural Municipal Assembly from  the Dalit or minority communities, having possessed the qualifications referred to in  clause (5), within fifteen days after receipt of the final results of the election to the
Rural Municipal Assembly referred to in Article 222.
(5) A person who has the following qualifications shall be qualified to be  elected to the office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Ward Chairperson and  member: -
(a)
One who is a citizen of Nepal;
(b)
One who has completed the age of twenty-one years;
(c)
One whose name is included in the electoral rolls of the Rural
Municipality;
(d)
One who is not disqualified by any law.
(6) The term of office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Ward
Chairperson and member shall be five years after the date of being elected.
(7) A person who has been elected as the Chairperson for two terms shall not  be eligible to be a candidate in an election to the Rural Municipality.
(8) The office of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Ward Chairperson or  member shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -
(a) In case the Chairperson tenders resignation in writing to the Vice-
Chairperson, and in case the Vice-Chairperson tenders resignation to  the Chairperson;
(b) In case his or her term of office expires;
(c) In case he or she dies.
(9) In case the seat falls vacant pursuant to clause (7) while the term of office  of the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson still remains for more than one year, the  vacancy shall be fulfilled through by-election for the remaining term.


216.
Provisions relating to Mayor and Deputy Mayor of Municipal Executive: (1) There  shall be a Mayor in each Municipality as Head of the Municipal Executive. The
Municipal Executive shall be formed under his or her chairpersonship.


(2) The Municipal Executive referred to in clause (1) shall consist of one
Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson elected from each Ward and members elected  pursuant to clause (4).
(3) The Mayor and the Deputy Mayor shall be elected by the voters residing  within the concerned Municipal area by secret ballots on the basis of one person one  vote, in accordance with the first past the post electoral system.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "Mayor" and "Deputy Mayor" mean the
Mayor and the Deputy Mayor of the Municipal Executive.
(4) The members of the Municipal Executive shall also include five women  members elected by the members of the Municipal Assembly from amongst  themselves and three members elected by the Municipal Assembly from the Dalit or  minority communities, in possession of the qualifications referred to in clause (5)  within fifteen days after the final results of the election to the Municipal Assembly  pursuant to Article 223.
(5) A person who has the following qualifications shall be qualified to be  elected to the office of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson and member:-
(a)
One who is a citizen of Nepal;
(b)
One who has completed the age of twenty-one years;
(c)
One whose name is included in the electoral rolls of the Municipality;
(d)
One who is not disqualified by any law.
(6) The term of office of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson and  member shall be five years after the date of being elected.
(7) A person who has been elected as the Mayor for two terms shall not be  eligible to be a candidate in an election to the Municipality.
(8) The office of the Mayor, Deputy Mayor, Ward Chairperson or Member  shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-


(a)
In case the Mayor tenders resignation in writing to the Deputy Mayor,  and in case the Deputy Mayor tenders resignation in writing to the
Mayor;
(b)
In case his or her term of office expires;
(c)
In case he or she dies.
(9) In case the seat falls vacant pursuant to clause (8) while the term of office  of the Mayor or Deputy Mayor still remains for more than one year, the vacancy shall  be fulfilled through by-election for the remaining term of office.
217.
Judicial Committee: (1) There shall be a three-member judicial committee to be  coordinated by its Vice-Chairperson in case of a Rural Municipality and by its Deputy
Mayor in case of a Municipality, in order to settle disputes under their respective  jurisdictions in accordance with law.


(2) The judicial committee referred to in clause (1) shall consist of two  members elected by the members of the Rural Municipal Assembly or the Municipal
Assembly from amongst themselves.
218.
Conduct of Business of Rural Municipal Executive and Municipal Executive:
Allocation and conduct of business of the Rural Municipal Executive and the
Municipal Executive shall be carried out in accordance with the rules approved by the
Rural Municipal Executive and the Municipal Executive, respectively.
219.
Other Provisions relating to Local Level Executive: Other provisions relating to the
Local Level Executive, except those contained in this Part, shall be as provided for in  the federal law subject to this Constitution.
220.
District Assembly and District Coordination Committee: (1) There shall be a District
Assembly to make coordination between the Rural Municipalities and Municipalities  within a district.


(2) The District Assembly shall consist of Chairpersons and Vice-Chairpersons  of Rural Municipal Executives, and Mayors and Deputy Mayors of Municipal
Executives within the district. The first meeting of the District Assembly shall be held  within thirty days of the date of final results of the election to the Village Assemblies  and the Municipal Assemblies.


(3) The District Assembly shall elect the District Coordination Committee  consisting of a maximum of nine Members including one Chief, one Deputy Chief, at  least three women and at least one Dalit or minority. The District Coordination
Committee shall discharge all functions required to be discharged by the District
Assembly.


(4) A Member of a Rural Municipal Assembly or Municipal Assembly within the  concerned district shall be eligible to be a candidate for the office of Chief, Deputy
Chief or Member of the District Coordination Committee. In case a member is elected  to the office of Chief, Deputy Chief or Member of the District Coordination
Committee, his or her office of Member of Rural Municipal Assembly or of
Municipal Assembly, as the case may be, shall ipso facto fall vacant.


(5) The term of office of the Chief, Deputy Chief and member of the District
Coordination Committee shall be five years after the date of being elected.


(6) The office of the Chief, Deputy Chief and member of the District
Coordination Committee shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case the Chief tenders resignation in writing to the Deputy Chief,  and in case the Deputy Chief or member tenders resignation in  writing to the Chief;
(b)
In case his or her term of office expires;
(c)
In case he or she dies.


(7) The functions, duties and powers of the District Assembly shall be as  follows: -
(a)
To make coordination between the Rural Municipalities and
Municipalities within the district;
(b)
To monitor development and construction works to make balance of  such works;
(c)
To make coordination between the Federal and the Provincial
Government offices and Rural Municipalities and Municipalities in  the district;


(d)
To perform such other functions as provided for in the provincial law.


(8) Provisions relating to the conduct of the District Assembly, facilities of
Members of the District Coordination Committee and other matters relating to the
District Assembly shall be as provided for in the provincial law.


Part-18
Local Legislature
221.
Legislative Powers of Local Level: (1) Subject to this Constitution, the legislative  powers of the Local Level shall be vested in the Rural Municipal Assembly and the
Municipal Assembly.


(2) The legislative powers of the Rural Municipal Assembly and the
Municipal Assembly shall be as enumerated in the lists contained in Schedule-8 and
Schedule-9.
222.
Composition of Rural Municipal Assembly: (1) There shall be a Rural Municipal
Assembly in each Rural Municipality.
(2) A Rural Municipal Assembly referred to in clause (1) shall consist of the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Rural Municipal Executive, Ward
Chairpersons, and four members elected from each ward and Members of the Rural
Municipal Executive elected from Dalit and minority communities pursuant to clause
(4) of Article 215.
(3) A Rural Municipal Assembly to be formed pursuant to clause (1) shall  have representation of at least two women from each ward.
(4) Each ward of a Rural Municipality shall have a Ward Committee  composed of the Ward Chairperson and four members in accordance with the federal  law. Such Ward Chairperson and Ward members shall be elected in accordance with  the first past the post electoral system.
(5) Every person who has completed the age of eighteen years and whose  name is included in the electoral rolls of the Rural Municipality shall have a right to  vote as provided for in the federal law.
(6) A person who has the following qualifications shall be eligible to become a  candidate for the office of the Member of the Rural Municipal Assembly:-
(a)
One who is a citizen of Nepal;
(b)
One who has completed the age of twenty-one years;


(c)
One whose name is included as a voter in the electoral rolls of the
Rural Municipality; and
(d)
One who is not disqualified by any law.
(7) Matters relating to the election to the Rural Municipal Assembly and other  matters pertaining thereto shall be as provided for in the federal law.
223.
Composition of Municipal Assembly: (1) Each Municipality shall have a Municipal
Assembly.
(2) A Municipal Assembly referred to in clause (1) shall consist of the Mayor  and the Deputy Mayor of the Municipal Executive, Ward Chairpersons, and four  members elected from each Ward and members of the Municipal Executive elected  from Dalit or minority communities pursuant to clause (4) of Article 216.
(3) A Municipal Assembly to be formed pursuant to (1) shall have  representation of at least two women from each Ward.
(4) Each ward of a Municipality shall have a Ward Committee composed of  one Ward Chairperson and four members as provided for in the federal law. Such
Ward Chairperson and Ward members shall be elected in accordance with the first  past the post electoral system.
(5) Every person who has completed the age of eighteen years and whose  name is included in the electoral rolls of the Municipality shall have a right to vote as  provided for in federal law.
(6) A person who has the following qualifications shall be qualified to be a  candidate for the office of member of the Municipal Assembly:-
(a)
One who is a citizen of Nepal;
(b)
One who has completed the age of twenty-one years;
(c)
One whose name included in the electoral rolls of the Municipality;  and
(d)
One who is not disqualified by any law.
(7) Matters relating to the election to the Municipal Assembly and other  matters pertaining thereto shall be as provided for in the federal law.


224.
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Rural Municipal Assembly and Municipal
Assembly: The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of a Rural Municipal Executive  and the Mayor and Deputy Mayor of a Municipal Executive shall ipso facto be the
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Rural Municipal Assembly and the
Municipal Assembly, respectively, and perform functions as such.
225.
Term of Rural Municipal Assembly and Municipal Assembly: The term of a Rural
Municipal Assembly and of a Municipal Assembly shall be five years from the date of  election. Election to another Rural Municipal Assembly and Municipal Assembly  shall be completed within six months of the expiration of such term.
226.
Powers to Make Law: (1) A Rural Municipal Assembly and Municipal Assembly may  make necessary laws on the matters enumerated in the lists contained in Schedule-8  and Schedule-9.


(2) The process for making laws referred to in clause (1) shall be as provided  for in a provincial law.
227.
Other Matters relating to Rural Municipal Assembly and Municipal Assembly: Other  matters relating to the conduct of business of a Rural Municipal Assembly and
Municipal Assembly, rules of procedures of meetings, formation of committees,  conditions in which the office of member falls vacant, facilities to be entitled to  members of the Rural Municipal Assembly and Municipal Assembly and employees  and offices of the Rural Municipality and Municipality, as the case may be, shall be as  provided for in a provincial law.


Part-19
Local Financial Procedures
228.
No Tax to be levied or Loan to be raised: (1) No tax shall be levied and collected and  no loan raised in the Local Level except in accordance with law.
(2) The Local Level may levy tax by making a law on matters falling within its  jurisdiction without prejudice to national economic policies, carriage of goods and  services, capital and labour market, and the neighbouring Province or Local Level.
229.
Local Consolidated Fund:  (1) There shall be a Local Consolidate Fund in each Rural
Municipality and Municipality under the Local Level. All revenues received by the Rural
Municipality or Municipality, any amounts of grants received from the Government of
Nepal and the Provincial Government, all loans raised by the Rural Municipality and
Municipality, and amounts received from other sources shall be credited to such Fund.


(2) Matters relating to expenditures from the Local Consolidated Fund referred  to in clause (1) shall be as provided for in a Local law.
230.
Estimates of Revenues and Expenditures of Rural Municipality and Municipality: (1)
The Rural Municipal Executive and the Municipal Executive shall, subject to this
Constitution, lay an estimate of revenues and expenditures of every fiscal year before, and  have the estimate adopted by, the Rural Municipal Assembly and the Municipal
Assembly, respectively, as provided for in the Local law.


(2) In case, in laying an estimate of revenues and expenditures pursuant to  clause (1), the Rural Municipal Executive or Municipal Executive is required to make  a deficit budget, it shall also propose the sources to meet the deficit as provided for in  the federal law and provincial law.


Part-20
Interrelations between Federation, Province and Local Level
231.
Legislative Interrelations between Federation and Provinces: (1) A federal law may be  made to be applicable to the whole of, or, if required, to any part of, the territory of
Nepal.
(2) A provincial law may be made to be applicable to the whole of, or as  required, to any part of the territory of the Province.
(3) In case two or more Provinces make a request to the Government of Nepal  to make laws on any matter enumerated in Schedule-6, the Federal Parliament may  make necessary laws. Such laws shall be applicable to the concerned Provinces only.
232.
Relations between Federation, Province and Local Level: (1) The relations between  the Federation, Provinces and Local Levels shall be based on the principles of  cooperation, co-existence and coordination.
(2) The Government of Nepal may, in accordance with this Constitution and  federal law, give necessary directions to any Provincial Council of Ministers on  matters of national importance and on matters to be coordinated among the Provinces,  and it shall be the duty of the concerned Provincial Council of Ministers to abide by  such directions.
(3) In case any type of act that may seriously undermine the sovereignty,  territorial integrity, nationality or independence of Nepal is carried out in any
Province, the President may, as required, warn such Provincial Council of Ministers,  suspend the Provincial Council of Ministers and the Provincial Assembly for a period  not exceeding six months or dissolve them.
(4) Any suspension or dissolution of any Provincial Council of Ministers and  the Provincial Assembly shall be approved by a majority of the total number of the  then members of the Federal Parliament within thirty-five days.
(5) In case dissolution made pursuant to clause (3) is approved by the Federal
Parliament, election to the Provincial Assembly shall be held in such Province within  six months.


Provided that such suspension or dissolution shall, ipso facto be ceased to  operate in case the Federal Parliament does not approve it.
(6) The Federal Rule shall apply to such Province during the period of such  suspension in case the suspension made pursuant to clause (3) is approved pursuant to  clause (4) and until the election to the Provincial Assembly is held pursuant to clause
(5).
(7) During the continuance of the Federal Rule, the Federal Parliament may  make laws with respect to any matter enumerated in the List contained in Schedule-6.
Such laws shall continue to apply until repealed by another laws made by the  concerned Provincial Assembly.
(8) The Government of Nepal may, directly or through the Provincial
Government, render necessary assistance and give necessary directives to any Rural
Municipal Executive or Municipal Executive in accordance with this Constitution and  the federal law. It shall be the duty of the Rural Municipal Executive or Municipal
Executive to abide by such directives.
233.
Relations between Provinces: (1) One Province shall render assistance in the  execution of legal provisions or judicial and administrative decisions or orders of  another Province.
(2) A Province may exchange information and consult with another Province  on matters of common concern and interest, coordinate each other on their activities  and legislations and extend mutual assistance.
(3) A Province shall, in accordance with its provincial law, provide equal  security, treatment and facility to residents of another Province.
234.
Inter-Province Council: (1) There shall be an Inter-Province Council as follows to  settle political disputes arising out between the Federation and a Province and  between Provinces:-
(a)
Prime Minister
- Chairperson
(b)
Minister for Home Affairs of the Government of Nepal
- Member
(c)
Minister for Finance of the Government of Nepal
- Member
(d)
Chief Ministers of the concerned Province
- Member


(2) The Inter-Province Council may meet as required.
(3) The Inter-Province Council may invite to its meeting a Minister of the
Government of Nepal and a Minister of the concerned Province who is responsible for  the matter of dispute and a concerned expert.
(4) The rules of procedures of the meeting of the Inter-Province Council shall  be as determined by the Council itself.
235.
Coordination between Federation, Province and Local Level: (1) The Federal
Parliament shall make necessary laws in order to maintain coordination between the
Federation, Province and Local Level.


(2) The Provincial Assembly may maintain coordination between the Province  and Rural Municipalities or Municipalities and settle political disputes, if any, that  have arisen, in coordination with the concerned Rural Municipality, Municipality and  the District Coordination Committee.


(3) The processes and procedures for the settlement of disputes referred to in  clause (2) shall be as provided for in the provincial law.
236.
Inter-Province Commerce: Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this
Constitution, it is prohibited to make any type of obstruction to the carriage of goods  or extension of services by a Province or Local Level to another Province or Local
Level or to the carriage of goods or extension of services to any Province or Local
Level or to levy tax, fee or charge thereon or to make any type of discrimination on  the carriage or extension of such services or goods.
237.
Not to Affect Jurisdiction of Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court: Nothing  contained in this Part shall affect the jurisdiction of the Constitutional Bench of the
Supreme Court referred to in Article 137.


Part-21
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority
238.
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority: (1) There shall be a
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority of Nepal consisting of the
Chief Commissioner and four other Commissioners. The Chief Commissioner shall  act as the Chairperson of the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority.
(2) The President shall, on recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners.
(3) The term of office of the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners shall be  six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the Chief
Commissioner or a Commissioner shall fall vacant in any of the following  circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years,
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to  physical or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Chief Commissioner and Commissioners appointed pursuant to clause
(2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Commissioner may be appointed to the office of Chief
Commissioner, and when a Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief Commissioner,  his or her term of office shall be so computed as to include his or her term as the
Commissioner.


(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chief Commissioner or a
Commissioner of the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority in case  he or she possesses the following qualifications:-
(a)
One who has acquired a bachelor's degree from a recognized  university;
(b)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment;
(c)
One who has gained at least twenty years of experiences in the field  of either accounting, revenue, engineering, law, development or  research and being a distinguished person;
(d)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years; and
(e)
One who bears high moral character.
(7) The remuneration and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief
Commissioner and the Commissioners shall be as provided for in the federal law. The  remuneration and terms and conditions of service of the Chief Commissioner and the
Commissioners shall not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner  shall not be eligible for appointment in other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
239.
Functions, Duties and Powers of Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of
Authority: (1) The Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority may, in  accordance with law, conduct, or cause to be conducted investigations of any abuse of  authority committed through corruption by any person holding public office.


Provided that this clause shall not apply to any official in relation to whom this
Constitution itself separately provides for such action and to any official in relation to  whom other law provides for a separate special provision.
(2) In the case of the persons who may be removed from the office by the  virtue of adoption of a motion of impeachment pursuant to Article 101, the Judges  who may be removed by the Judicial Council and the persons who are liable to action  in accordance with the Army Act, it may conduct, or cause to be conducted,  investigations in accordance with the federal law after they have been removed from  office.
(3) In case the Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority finds,  on investigation conducted pursuant to clause (1) or (2), that a person holding public  office has committed an act which is defined by law as corruption, it may file, or  cause to be filed, a case against that person and other person involved in that offense  in the competent court in accordance with law.
(4) In case, on investigation conducted pursuant to clause (1) or (2), any act or  action done or taken by a person holding public office appears to be of such nature as  to be falling under the jurisdiction of another official or institution, the Commission  for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority may write to the concerned official or  institution for necessary action.
(5) The Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority may delegate  any of its functions, duties and powers on the conducting of investigations or filing  cases, to the Chief Commissioner, a Commissioner or an officer employee of the
Government of Nepal to be exercised and complied with subject to the specified  conditions.
(6) Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the
Commission for the Investigation of Abuse of Authority shall be as provided for in  the federal law.


Part-22
Auditor General
240.
Auditor General: (1) There shall be an Auditor General of Nepal.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Auditor General.
(3) The term of office of the Auditor General shall be six years from the date  of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the Auditor
General shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Auditor General appointed pursuant to clause (2) shall not be eligible  for reappointment.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Auditor General in case he  or she possesses the following qualifications:-
(a)
One who has served in the Special Class of the Government of Nepal  or having at least twenty years of experiences in audit related work,  after having obtained a bachelor's degree in management, commerce  or accounting from a recognized university or having passed a  chartered accountancy examination;


(b)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment;
(c)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years; and
(d)
One who bears high moral character.
(7) The remuneration and terms and conditions of service of the Auditor
General shall be as provided for in the federal law. The remuneration and conditions  of service of the Auditor General shall not, so long as he or she holds office, be  altered to his or her disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Auditor General shall not be eligible for  appointment in another government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
241.
Functions, Duties and Powers of Auditor-General: (1) The accounts of all Federal and
Provincial Government Offices including the Office of the President, Office of the
Vice-President, Supreme Court, Federal Parliament, Provincial Assembly, Provincial
Government, Local Level, Constitutional Bodies and Offices thereof, Courts, Office  of the Attorney General, Nepal Army, Nepal Police and Armed Police Force, Nepal  shall be audited by the Auditor-General in accordance with law, having regard to,  inter alia, the regularity, economy, efficiency, effectiveness and the propriety thereof.
(2) The Auditor General shall be consulted in the matter of appointment of an  auditor to carry out the audit of a corporate body of which the Government of Nepal  or Provincial Government owns more than fifty percent of the shares or assets. The
Auditor General may also issue necessary directives setting forth the principles for  carrying out the audit of such corporate body.
(3) The Auditor General shall, at all times, have power to examine any books  of accounts for the purpose of carrying out the functions referred to in clause (1). It

shall be the duty of the concerned chief of office to provide all such documents and  information as may be demanded by the Auditor General or any of his or her  employees.
(4) The accounts to be audited pursuant to clause (1) shall be maintained in the  form prescribed by the Auditor General, as provided for in the federal law.
(5) In addition to the accounts of the offices referred to in clause (1), federal  law may also require the accounts of any other offices or bodies to be audited by the
Auditor General.


Part-23
Public Service Commission
242.
Public Service Commission (1) There shall be a Public Service Commission of Nepal,  consisting of the Chairperson and four other Members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and Members.
(3) At least fifty percent of the total number of Members of the Public Service
Commission shall be appointed from amongst the persons who have worked for  twenty years or more in any government service, and the rest of the Members shall be  appointed from amongst the persons who hold reputation after having conducted  research, studies, teaching or any other significant work in the field of science,  technology, art, literature, law, public administration, sociology or other sphere of  national life.
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson and Members of the Public Service
Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(5) The Chairperson and Members appointed pursuant to clause (2) shall not  be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson, and  when a Member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office shall be  so computed as to include his or her term as the Member.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (4), the office of the
Chairperson or a Member of the Public Service Commission shall fall vacant in any of  the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from the office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or

her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the Public Service Commission in case he or she possesses the following  qualifications:-
(a)
One who has acquired a Master's degree from a recognized  university;
(b)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment;
(c)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years; and
(d)
One who bears high moral character.
(8) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and  the members of the Public Service Commission shall be as provided for in the federal  law. The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the Members  of the Public Service Commission shall not be altered to their disadvantage, so long as  they hold office.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(9) A person once appointed as the Chairperson and the members of the Public
Service Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other government  service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
243.
Functions, Duties and Powers of Public Service Commission: (1) It shall be the duty  of the Public Service Commission to conduct examinations for the selection of  suitable candidates to be appointed to the positions in the Civil Service.


Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "positions in the Civil Service" means  all positions in the services of the Government of Nepal, other than the positions in  the services of Army personnel, Nepal Police or Armed Police Force, Nepal and such  other positions in the services as are excluded by an Act from the Civil Service.
(2) The Public Service Commission shall conduct written examinations to be  held for appointment to the offices of the Nepal Army, Nepal Police, Armed Police
Force, Nepal, other federal governmental services and of bodies corporate, other than  the positions in the Civil Service.
Explanation: For the purposes of this Article, "body corporate" means a corporation,  company, bank or board of which more than fifty percent or more of the shares or  assets is owned or controlled by the Government of Nepal, except a University or
Teacher Service Commission, or a Commission, Corporation, Authority, Body,
Academy, Board, Centre, Council and other body corporate of similar nature  established under federal law or formed by the Government of Nepal.
(3) The Public Service Commission shall be consulted on the general  principles to be followed in the course of making appointment and promotion to any  position of the Nepal Army, Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal and other  federal government services.
(4) The Public Service Commission shall be consulted on the laws relating to  the conditions of service of the employees in the service of a body corporate and on  the general principles to be followed in the course of making promotion to any  position of such service and taking departmental action against any such employee.
(5) No permanent appointment to any pensionable position chargeable on the
Government of Nepal shall be made except in consultation with the Public Service
Commission.
(6) The Public Service Commission shall be consulted on the following  subjects: -
(a)
Matters concerning the law relating to the conditions of service of  the Federal Civil Service;


(b)
Principles to be followed in making appointments to, promotions to,  the Federal Civil Service or positions thereof and taking  departmental action;
(c)
Matters concerning the suitability of any candidate for appointment  to the Federal Civil Service position for a period of more than six  months;
(d)
Matters concerning the suitability of any candidate for transfer or  promotion from a position in one type of Federal Civil Service to a  position in other type of Federal Civil Service or transfer or  promotion from other government service to the Federal Civil
Service or for a change in service or transfer from a position in a
Provincial Civil Service to a position in the Federal Civil Service or  from a position in the Federal Civil Service to a Provincial Civil
Service;
(e)
Matters concerning the permanent transfer or promotion of an  employee working in any position which does not require  consultation with the Public Service Commission to any position  which requires consultation with the Public Service Commission;  and
(f)
Matters relating to departmental action against any employee of the
Federal Civil Service.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (6), matters falling within the  jurisdiction of the Judicial Service Commission referred to in Article 154 shall be as  provided for in that Article.
(8) The Public Service Commission may delegate any of its functions, duties  and powers to its Chairperson or Member, an employee of the Government of Nepal  as to be exercised and complied with subject to the specified conditions.
(9) Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the Public
Service Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
244.
Provisions relating to Provincial Public Service Commission: (1) Each Province shall  have a Provincial Public Service Commission.


(2) The functions, duties and powers of the Provincial Public Service
Commission shall be as provided for in the provincial law.
(3) The Federal Parliament shall by a law determine grounds and standards for  the purposes of clause (2).


Part-24
Election Commission
245.
Election Commission (1) There shall be an Election Commission of Nepal, consisting  of a Chief Commissioner and four other Commissioners. The Chief Commissioner  shall act as the chairperson of the Election Commission.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chief Election Commissioner and Commissioners.
(3) The term of office of the Chief Election Commissioner and Commissioners  of the Election Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the Chief
Election Commissioner or Election Commissioner shall fall vacant in any of the  following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Chief Election Commissioner and Commissioners appointed pursuant  to clause (2) shall not be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Commissioner may be appointed to the office of Chief
Election Commissioner, and when a Commissioner is so appointed as the Chief
Election Commissioner, his or her term of office shall be so computed as to include  his or her term as the Commissioner.


(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chief Election
Commissioner or an Election Commissioner in case he or she possesses the following  qualifications:-
(a)
One who has attained a bachelor's degree from a recognized  university;
(b)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment;
(c)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years; and
(d)
One who bears high moral character.
(7) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chief Election
Commissioner and Election Commissioners shall be as provided for in the federal  law. The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chief Election Commissioner  and the Commissioners shall not be altered to their disadvantage so long as they hold  office.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chief Election Commissioner and a
Commissioner of the Election Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in  other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
246.
Functions, Duties and Powers of Election Commission: (1) The Election Commission  shall, subject to this Constitution and federal law, conduct, supervise, direct and  control the election to the President, Vice-President, members of the Federal
Parliament, members of Provincial Assemblies and members of Local Level. The
Election Commission shall, for these purposes, prepare electoral rolls.
(2) The Election Commission shall hold a referendum on a matter of national  importance in accordance with this Constitution and federal law


(3) In case, after nomination of candidacy for the President, Vice-President,  member of the Federal Parliament, member of Provincial Assemblies or member of
Local Level has been filed but before the election results are declared, a question  arises about the qualification of a candidate, the Election Commission shall decide  that question.
(4) The Election Commission may so delegate any of its functions, duties and  powers to the Chief Election Commissioner, Election Commissioner or any  government employee as to be exercised and complied with subject to the specified  conditions.
(5) Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the Election
Commission shall be as provided for in federal law.
247.
To provide Necessary Assistance to Election Commission: The Government of Nepal,
Provincial Government and Local Government shall provide such employees and  other assistance to the Election Commission as may be required to perform its  functions in accordance with this Constitution.


Part-25
National Human Rights Commission
248.
National Human Rights Commission: (1) There shall be a National Human Rights
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Human Rights Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the National Human
Rights Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) The Chairperson and members appointed pursuant to clause (2) shall not  be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a Member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson, and  when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office shall be  so computed as to include his or her term as the Member.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the
Chairperson or member of the National Human Rights Commission shall fall vacant  in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(c)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(d)
In case he or she dies.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the National Human Rights Commission in case he or she possesses the following  qualifications:-


(a)
In the case of the Chairperson, one who is a retired Chief Justice or  a retired Justice of Supreme Court and has rendered outstanding  contribution to the protection and promotion of human rights or  being a renowned person having been active for at least twenty  years in and rendered outstanding contribution to the protection and  promotion of human rights or to various fields of national life;
(b)
In the case of a Member, one who is involved in the field of the  protection and promotion of human rights or rights and interests of  the child or being a renowned person having been active for at least  twenty years in and rendered outstanding contribution to various  fields of national life;
(c)
One who has acquired a Bachelor's degree from a recognized  university;
(d)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years;
(e)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment;
(f)
One who bears high moral character.
(7) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and  members of the National Human Rights Commission shall be as provided for in the  federal law. The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson and  members of the National Human Rights Commission shall not, so long as they hold  office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the National
Human Rights Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other government  service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which

has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
249.
Functions, Duties and Powers of National Human Rights Commission: (1) It shall be  the duty of the National Human Rights Commission to respect, protect and promote  human rights and ensure effective enforcement thereof.
(2) For the accomplishment of the duty referred to in clause (1), the National
Human Rights Commission shall perform the following functions:
(a)
To inquire, on its own initiative or on petition or complaint presented  in or sent to the Commission by a victim or any person on his or her  behalf or on information received by the Commission from any  source, into and investigate complaints of violations of human rights  of an individual or group or abetment thereof, and make  recommendation for action against the perpetrators;
(b)
In case any official who has the responsibility or duty to prevent  violations of human rights fails to fulfil or perform his or her  responsibility or duty or shows reluctance in the fulfilment or  performance of his or her responsibility or duty, to make  recommendation to the concerned authority to take departmental  action against such official;
(c)
In case it is required to institute a case against any person or  organization  who  has  violated  human  rights,  to  make  recommendation to file a case in the court in accordance with law;
(d)
To coordinate and collaborate with civil society in order to enhance  awareness on human rights;
(e)
To make recommendation, accompanied by the reasons and grounds,  to the concerned body for taking departmental action against and  imposing punishment on those who are violators of human rights;
(f)
To carry out periodic reviews of the relevant laws relating to human  rights and make recommendation to the Government of Nepal for  necessary improvements in and amendments to such laws;


(g)
In case Nepal has to become a party to any international treaty or  agreement on human rights, to make recommendation, accompanied  by the reasons therefor, to the Government of Nepal; and monitor  whether any such treaty or an agreement to which Nepal is already a  party has been implemented, and in case it is found not to have been  implemented, to make recommendation to the Government of Nepal  for its implementation;
(h)
To publish, in accordance with law, the names of the officials,  persons or bodies who have failed to observe or implement any  recommendations or directives made or given by the National Human
Rights Commission in relation to the violations of human rights, and  record them as violators of human rights.
(3) In discharging its functions or performing its duties, the National Human
Rights Commission may exercise the following powers: -
(a)
To exercise all such powers as of a court in respect of the summoning  and requiring the presence of any person before the Commission and  seeking and recording his or her information or statements or  depositions, examining evidence and producing exhibits and proofs;
(b)
On receipt of information by the Commission in any manner that a  serious violation of human rights has already been committed or is  going to be committed, to search any person or his or her residence or  office, enter such residence or office without notice, and, in the course  of making such search, take possession of any document, evidence or  proof related with the violation of human rights;
(c)
In the event of necessity to take action immediately on receipt of  information that the human rights of any person are being violated, to  enter any government office or any other place without notice and  rescue such person;
(d)
To order for the provision of compensation in accordance with law to  any person who is a victim of the violations of human rights.
(4) The National Human Rights Commission may so delegate any of its  functions, duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its


Members or a government employee as to be exercised and complied with subject to  the specified conditions.
(5) Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the National
Human Rights Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.



Part-26
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission
250.
National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission: (1) There shall be a National
Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission of Nepal, consisting of a maximum of five  members including a Chairperson.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the National Natural
Resources and Fiscal Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the
Chairperson or member of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission  shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Chairperson and members appointed pursuant to clause (2) shall not  be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson, and  when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office shall be  so computed as to include his or her term as the member.


(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission in case he or she possesses  the following qualifications:-
(a)
One who has expertise upon being active for at least twenty years in  the field of natural resources or fiscal management, economics, law,  management, after holding a bachelor's degree in the relevant subject  from a recognized university;
(b)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment,
(c)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years,
(d)
One who bears high moral character.
(7) The remuneration and other conditions of service of the Chairperson and  members of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall be as  provided for in the federal law, and their remuneration and conditions of service shall  not, so long as they hold office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the National
Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in  other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
251.
Functions, Duties and Powers of National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission:
(1) The functions, duties and powers of the National Natural Resources and Fiscal
Commission shall be as follows:-
(a)
To determine detailed basis and modality for the distribution of  revenues between the Federal, Provinces and Local Governments out

of the Federal Consolidated Fund in accordance with the Constitution  and law;
(b)
To make a recommendation about equalization grants to be provided to  the Province and Local Governments out of the Federal Consolidated
Fund;
(c)
To conduct study and research work and prepare parameters as to  conditional grants to be provided to the Province and Local
Governments in accordance with national policies and programs,  norms and condition of infrastructures;
(d)
To determine detailed basis and modality for the distribution of  revenues between the Province and Local Governments out of the
Provincial Consolidated Fund;
(e)
To recommend measures to meet expenditures of the Federal, Province  and Local Governments, and to reform revenue collection;
(f)
To analyse macro-economic indicators and recommend ceiling of  internal loans that the Federal, Province and Local Governments can  borrow;
(g)
To review the bases for the distribution between the Federal and
Provincial Governments of revenues and recommend for revision;
(h)
To set bases for the determination of shares of the Government of
Nepal, Provincial Government and Local Level in investments and  returns, in the mobilization of natural resources;
(i)
To do study and research work on possible disputes that may arise  between the Federation and the Provinces, between Provinces, between  a Province and a Local Level, and between Local Levels, and make  suggestions to act in a coordinated manner for the prevention of such  disputes.
(2) The National Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission shall carry out  necessary study and research work about environmental impact assessment required  in the course of distribution of natural resources, and make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal.


(3) Other functions, duties and powers and rules of procedure of the National
Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission, detailed bases required to be followed in  the mobilization of natural resources or distribution of revenues, and other matters  including conditions of service of the officials of the Commission shall be as provided  for in the federal law.


Part-27
Other Commissions
252.
National Women Commission: (1) There shall be a National Women Commission of
Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Women Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the National Women
Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the
Chairperson or member of the National Women Commission shall fall vacant in any  of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Chairperson and members appointed pursuant to clause (2) shall not  be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson, and  when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office shall be  so computed as to include his or her term as the member.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the National Women Commission in case he or she possesses the following  qualifications:-


(a)
A woman who has rendered outstanding contribution, for at least ten  years, in the field of rights and interests of women or gender justice or  women development or human rights and law;
(b)
In the case of the Chairperson, one who has acquired a Bachelor's  degree from a recognized university;
(c)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years;
(d)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment, and
(e)
One who bears high moral character.
(7) The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson and  members of the National Women Commission shall be as provided for in the federal  law, and their remuneration and conditions of service shall not, so long as they hold  office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the National
Women Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other government  service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
253.
Functions, Duties and Powers of National Women Commission: (1) The functions,  duties and powers of the National Women Commission shall be as follows:-
(a)
To formulate policies and programs concerning the rights and interests of  the women and submit them to the Government of Nepal for  implementation;
(b)
To monitor as to whether or not laws concerning the rights and interests of  the women and obligations under the international treaties to which Nepal

is a party have been implemented, and make suggestions, accompanied by  the measures for their effective compliance and implementation to the
Government of Nepal;
(c)
In order to have the women included in the mainstream of national  development and ensure proportional participation in all organs of the
State, to assess, monitor and evaluate the existing policies and programs,  and make recommendation to the Government of Nepal for their effective  implementation;
(d)
To carry out study and research work on the legal provisions relating to  gender equality, empowerment of women and relating to women, make  recommendations to the concerned bodies on reforms to be made on such  laws, and monitor the same;
(e)
To make suggestions to the Government of Nepal about the preparation of  reports to be submitted by Nepal in accordance with the provisions  contained in the international treaties or agreements concerning women's  rights, to which Nepal is a party;
(f)
In case it is necessary to file cases against any persons or bodies on matters  of violence against women or being subjected to social ill-practices or  infringement of or deprivation of enjoyment of women's rights, to make  recommendations to the concerned bodies to file such cases in courts in  accordance with the law.
(2) The National Women Commission may so delegate any of its functions,  duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its members or any  employee of the Government of Nepal as to be exercised and complied with subject to  the specified conditions.
(3) Other functions, duties and powers and other relevant matters of the
National Women Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
254.
Powers to Establish Offices in Provinces: The National Women Rights Commission  may, as required, establish its offices in Provinces.
255.
National Dalit Commission: (1) There shall be a National Dalit Commission of Nepal,  consisting of a Chairperson and four other members.


(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Dalit Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the National Dalit
Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the
Chairperson or member of the National Dalit Commission shall fall vacant in any of  the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Chairperson and members appointed pursuant to clause (2) shall not  be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson, and  when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office shall be  so computed as to include his or her term as the member.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the National Dalit Commission in case he or she possesses the following  qualifications:
(a)
One who has rendered outstanding contribution to the field of rights  and interests of the Dalit community or human rights and law, for at  least ten years;
(b)
In the case of the Chairperson, one who has acquired at least a  bachelor's degree from a recognized university;
(c)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years;


(d)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment; and
(e)
One who bears high moral character.
(7) The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson and  members of the National Dalit Commission shall be as provided for in the federal  law, and their remuneration and conditions of service shall not, so long as they hold  office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the National
Dalit Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other government service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
256.
Functions, Duties and Powers of National Dalit Commission: (1) The functions,  duties and powers of the National Dalit Commission shall be as follows:-
(a)
To conduct study and research as to the overall situation of the Dalit  community, identify areas of necessary policy, legal and institutional  reforms in that field, and make recommendations to the Government of
Nepal;
(b)
To formulate national policies and programs concerning the interests of the
Dalit for the upliftment and development of the Dalit, putting an end to  caste-based discrimination, oppression and discrimination, and submit  such policies and programs to the Government of Nepal for their  implementation;
(c)
To monitor as to whether laws concerning the interests of the Dalit,  including the special provisions made for the upliftment and interests of  the Dalit community have been effectively implemented, and in the event

of absence of observance or implementation, to make suggestions to the
Government of Nepal for the observance or implementation thereof;
(d)
To make suggestions to the Government of Nepal about the preparation of  reports to be submitted by Nepal in accordance with the provisions  contained in the international treaties or agreements concerning the rights  of the Dalit community, to which Nepal is a party;
(e)
In order to have the Dalit community included in the mainstream of  national development and ensure proportional participation in all organs of  the State, to assess, monitor and evaluate the existing policies and  programs, and make recommendation to the Government of Nepal for their  effective implementation;
(f)
In case it is necessary to file a case against any person or institution on  matters of being a victim of caste-based discrimination and untouchability  or social ill-practices or infringement of or deprivation of enjoyment of the  rights of the Dalit, to make recommendations to the concerned bodies to  file such case in courts in accordance with the law.
(2) The National Dalit Commission may so delegate any of its functions,  duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its members or any  employee of the Government of Nepal as to be exercised and complied with subject to  the specified conditions.
(3) Other functions, duties and powers and other relevant matters of the
National Dalit Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
257.
Powers to Establish Offices in Provinces: The National Dalit Commission may, as  required, establish its offices in Provinces.
258.
National Inclusion Commission: (1) There shall be a National Inclusion Commission  of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other members in the maximum.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the National Inclusion Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the National
Inclusion Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.


(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (3), the office of the
Chairperson or member of the National Inclusion Commission shall fall vacant in any  of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case he or she attains the age of sixty-five years;
(c)
In case a motion of impeachment is adopted against him or her  pursuant to Article 101;
(d)
In case he or she is removed from office by the President on  recommendation of the Constitutional Council on grounds of his or  her inability to hold office and discharge the functions due to physical  or mental illness;
(e)
In case he or she dies.
(5) The Chairperson and members appointed pursuant to clause (2) shall not  be eligible for reappointment.
Provided that a member may be appointed to the office of Chairperson, and  when a member is so appointed as the Chairperson, his or her term of office shall be  so computed as to include his or her term as the member.
(6) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the National Inclusion Commission in case he or she possesses the following  qualifications:-
(a)
One who has rendered outstanding contribution, for at least ten years,  to the field of social inclusion, rights and interests or development of  persons with disabilities, minority and marginalized communities and  backward areas and classes or human rights;
(b)
In the case of the Chairperson, one who has acquired a bachelor's  degree from a recognized university;
(c)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years;
(d)
One who is not a member of any political party at the time of  appointment; and
(e)
One who bears high moral character.


(7) The remuneration and conditions of service of the Chairperson and  members of the National Inclusion Commission shall be as provided for in the federal  law, and their remuneration and conditions of service shall not, so long as they hold  office, be altered to their disadvantage.
Provided that this provision shall not apply in cases where a state of  emergency is declared because of extreme economic disarrays.
(8) A person once appointed as the Chairperson or a member of the National
Inclusion Commission shall not be eligible for appointment in other government  service.
Provided that nothing in this clause shall be deemed to be a bar to the  appointment to any political position or to any position which has the responsibility of  making investigations, inquiries or findings on any subject, or to any position which  has the responsibility of submitting advice, opinion or recommendation after carrying  out a study or research on any subject.
259.
Functions, Duties and Powers of National Inclusion Commission: (1) The functions,  duties and powers of the National Inclusion Commission shall be as follows:-
(a)
To conduct study and research works for the protection of the rights  and interests of the communities, including Khas Arya, Pichhada  class, persons with disabilities, senior citizens, labours, peasants,  minorities and marginalized community, backward class, people of
Karnali and the indigent class;
(b)
To study the status of implementation of the policies and laws  adopted by the Government of Nepal for the inclusion of the  community, class and region referred to in sub-clause (a) and make  suggestions to the Government for reforms;
(c)
To study as to whether or not there has been appropriate  representation of the community, class and region referred to in sub- clause (a) in the organs of the State and make suggestions to the
Government of Nepal to review the special provisions made for the  representation of such community, class and region;


(d)
To study as to whether or not the protection, empowerment and  development of the community, class and region referred to in sub- clause (a) has been satisfactory and make recommendations to the
Government of Nepal about policies to be pursued in the future;
(e)
To make suggestions to the Government of Nepal about policies and  programs to be pursued for the development and prosperity of the
Karnali and backward regions;
(f)
To make recommendations for timely revisions of laws concerning  minority and marginalized communities;
(g)
To monitor the status of implementation of rights and interests  guaranteed for minority and marginalized communities and make  recommendations for revision upon necessary review on the basis of  periodic national census and human development index.
(2) The National Inclusion Commission may so delegate any of its functions,  duties and powers to the Chairperson of the Commission, any of its members or any  employee of the Government of Nepal as to be exercised and complied with subject to  the specified conditions.
(3) Other functions, duties and powers and other relevant matters of the
National Inclusion Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
260.
Powers to Establish Offices in Provinces: The National Inclusion Commission may, as  required, establish its offices in Provinces.
261.
Indigenous Nationalities Commission: (1) There shall be an Indigenous Nationalities
Commission of Nepal, consisting of a Chairperson and four other members in  maximum.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the Indigenous Nationalities Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the Indigenous
Nationalities Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and  members of the Indigenous Nationalities Commission, circumstances in which their

offices fall vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and the functions,  duties and powers of this Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
262.
Madhesi Commission: (1) There shall be a Madhesi Commission of Nepal, consisting  of a Chairperson and four other members in the maximum.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the Madhesi Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the Madhesi
Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and  members of the Madhesi Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall  vacant, their remuneration and conditions of service and the functions, duties and  powers of this Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
263.
Tharu Commission: (1) There shall be a Tharu Commission of Nepal, consisting of a
Chairperson and four other members in the maximum.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the Tharu Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the Tharu
Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and  members of the Tharu Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall vacant,  their remuneration and conditions of service and the functions, duties and powers of  this Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
264.
Muslim Commission: (1) There shall be a Muslim Commission of Nepal, consisting of  a Chairperson and four other members in the maximum.
(2) The President shall, on the recommendation of the Constitutional Council,  appoint the Chairperson and members of the Muslim Commission.
(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the Muslim
Commission shall be six years from the date of appointment.
(4) Other matters relating to the qualification for the Chairperson and  members of the Muslim Commission, circumstances in which their offices fall vacant,

their remuneration and conditions of service and the functions, duties and powers of  this Commission shall be as provided for in the federal law.
265.
Review of Commissions: The Federal Parliament shall, after ten years of the  commencement of this Constitution, review the Commissions constituted under this
Part.


Part-28
Provisions Relating to National Security
266.
National Security Council: (1) There shall be a National Security Council for making  recommendation to the Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers for the  formulation of a policy on overall national interest, security and defence of Nepal, and  for the mobilization or control of the Nepal Army, which shall consist of the following  as the Chairperson and members:-
(a)
The Prime Minister
- Chairperson
(b)
Minister for Defence, Government of Nepal
- Member
(c)
Minister for Home, Government of Nepal
- Member
(d)
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Government of Nepal
-Member
(e)
Minister for Finance, Government of Nepal
- Member
(f)
Chief Secretary to Government of Nepal
- Member
(g)
Chief of the Army Staff, Nepal Army
- Member
(2) The secretary at the Ministry of Defence shall act as the member secretary  to the National Security Council.
(3) The National Security Council shall submit its annual report to the
President, and the President shall cause the report to be laid through the Prime
Minister before the Federal Parliament.
(4) Other matters relating to the National Security Council shall be as provided  for in the federal law.
267.
Provisions relating to Nepal Army: (1) There shall be an organization of the Nepal
Army, which shall be inclusive and committed to this Constitution, in order to  safeguard of independence, sovereignty, territorial integrity and freedom and national  unity of Nepal.


(2) The President shall be the Supreme Commander of the Nepal Army.


(3) Entry of women, Dalit, indigenous people, indigenous nationalities
(Aadibasi Janajati), Khas Arya, Madhesi, Tharu, Pichhada class and backward region

citizens into the Nepal Army shall, on the basis of principles of equality and inclusion,  be ensured by the federal law.


(4) The Government of Nepal may also mobilize the Nepal Army in other  works including development, construction and disaster management works, as  provided for in the federal law.


(5) The President shall, on recommendation of the Council of Ministers,  appoint the Chief of the Army Staff and remove him or her from office.


(6) The President shall, in accordance with a decision of the Government of
Nepal, Council of Ministers on recommendation of the National Security Council,  declare the mobilization of the Nepal Army in cases where a grave emergency arises  in regard to the sovereignty or territorial integrity of Nepal or the security of any part  thereof, by war, external aggression, armed rebellion or extreme economic disarrays.
A declaration of the mobilization of the Nepal Army shall be required to be approved  by the House of Representatives within one month after the date of such declaration.


(7) Other matters pertaining to the Nepal Army shall be in accordance with  law.
268.
Provisions Relating to Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal and National
Investigation Department: (1) The Federation shall have Nepal Police, Armed Police
Force, Nepal and National Investigation Department.


(2) Each Province shall have a Provincial Police Organization.


(3) Matters relating to the operation, supervision and coordination of functions  to be discharged by the Nepal Police and the Provincial police shall be as provided for  in federal law.
(4) Other matters relating to the Nepal Police, Armed Police Force, Nepal and
National Investigation Department shall be as provided for in the by federal law.


Part-29
Provisions Relating to Political Parties
269.
Formation, Registration and Operation of Political Parties: (1) Persons who are  committed to common political ideology, philosophy and program may, subject to  laws made pursuant to sub-clause (c) of clause (2) of Article 17, form and operate  political parties, and generate, or cause to be generated, publicity in order to secure  support and cooperation from public-in-general for their ideology, philosophy and  program or carry out other necessary activity for this purpose.
(2) A political party formed in accordance with clause (1) shall be required to  be registered the party with the Election Commission upon fulfilment of the  procedures as laid down by law.
(3) A petition to be filed for the purpose of registration of a party pursuant to  clause (2) shall be accompanied by the constitution and manifesto of the concerned  political party and such other documents as required by federal law.
(4) For a petition to be filed for the registration of a party pursuant to clause
(2), the political party shall fulfil the following conditions:-
(a)
Its constitution and rules shall be required  be democratic;
(b)
Its constitution shall provide for election of each of the office- bearers of the party at the Federal and Provincial levels at least once  in every five years;

Provided that nothing shall bar the making of provision in the  constitution of a political party to hold such election within six  months in the event of failure to hold election of its office-bearers  within five years because of occurrence a special circumstance;
(c)
There shall be a provision of such inclusive representation in its  executive committees at various levels as may be reflecting the  diversity of Nepal.


(5) In case the name, objective, insignia or flag of a political party is of such a  nature as to jeopardize the religious and communal unity of the country or to fragment  the country, that party shall not be registered.
270.
Restrictions on Imposition of Prohibition on Political Parties: (1) Any law,  arrangement or decision so made as to impose any restriction on the formation and  operation of a political party and on the generation of publicity in order to secure  support and cooperation from public-in-general for the ideology, philosophy and  program of the party pursuant to Article 269 shall be deemed to be inconsistent with  this Constitution and shall, ipso facto, be void.
(2) Any law, arrangement or decision so made as to allow for participation or  involvement of only a single political party or persons having similar political  ideology, philosophy or program in the elections or in the political system of, or in the  conduct of governance of the State shall be deemed to be inconsistent with this
Constitution and shall, ipso facto, be void.
271.
Registration required for Securing Recognition for the Purpose of Contesting
Elections as Political Party: (1) Every political party that is registered pursuant to
Article 269 and intends to secure recognition from the Election Commission for the  purposes of elections shall be registered with the Election Commission in fulfilment of  the procedures set forth in the federal law.


(2) The political party shall be required to submit a yearly audit report in  addition to the matters set forth in clause (3) of Article 269 a petition to be filed for the  purpose of clause (1) and also fulfil the terms set forth in clause (4) of that Article.
272.
Other Provisions relating to Political Parties: Provisions relating to the formation,  registration, operation and facilities of political parties and other matters pertaining  thereto shall be as provided for in the federal law.


Part-30
Emergency Powers
273.
Emergency Provisions: (1) In case a grave emergency arises in sovereignty, territorial  integrity or the security of any part of Nepal by the reason of war, external aggression,  armed rebellion, extreme economic disarrays, natural disaster or epidemic; the
President may, by Proclamation, declare or order a state of emergency in respect of the  whole of Nepal or of any particular part thereof.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), in case there arises a  grave emergency in a Province by the reason of a natural disaster or epidemic, the  concerned Provincial Government may request the Government of Nepal to declare a
Proclamation or order a state of emergency in respect of the whole of the Province or  of any specified part thereof, in accordance with this Article.
(3) The Proclamation or order issued pursuant to clause (1) shall be laid before  both Houses of the Federal Parliament for approval within one month from the date of  issuance of such proclamation or order.
(4) In case the Proclamation or order laid for approval pursuant to clause (3) is  approved by at least a two-thirds majority of the total number of the then members of  both Houses of the Federal Parliament, the Proclamation or order shall continue in  force for a period of three months from the date of its issuance.
(5) In case the Proclamation or an order laid for approval pursuant to clause (3)  is not approved pursuant to clause (4), the Proclamation or order shall ipso facto be  inoperative.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Article, prior to  expiration of the period referred to in clause (4), a motion to extend the period of the
Proclamation or order of state of emergency as referred to in clause (1) for another  period not exceeding three months may be submitted to the Federal Parliament.
(7) In case a motion referred to in clause (6) is adopted by at least two-thirds  majority of the total number of the then members of both Houses of the Federal
Parliament, the Proclamation or order shall continue in force for the period referred to  in that motion.


(8) In the event of dissolution of the House of Representatives, the powers  exercisable by the Federal Parliament pursuant to clauses (3), (4), (6) and (7) shall be  exercised by the National Assembly.
(9) The President may, after the issuance of a Proclamation or order of a state  of emergency pursuant to clause (1), issue such orders as are necessary to meet the  exigencies. Orders so issued shall be operative with the same force and effect as law  so long as the state of emergency is in operation.
(10) At the time of issuance of the Proclamation or order of a state of  emergency pursuant to clause (1), the fundamental rights as provided for in Part-3  may be suspended until the proclamation or order is in operation.
Provided that Article 16, sub-clauses (c) and (d) of clause (2) of Article 17,
Article 18, clause (2) of Article 19, Articles 20, 21, 22 and 24, clause (1) of Article
26, Articles 29, 30, 31, 32, 35, clauses (1) and (2) of Article 36, Articles 38, 39,  clauses (2) and (3) of Article 40, Articles 41, 42, 43, 45, and the right to constitutional  remedy in relation to such Articles pursuant to Article 46 and the right to seek the  remedy of habeas corpus shall not be suspended.
(11) In case any Article of this Constitution is suspended pursuant to clause
(10), no petition may lie in any court for the enforcement of the fundamental right  conferred by that Article nor may a question be raised in any Court in that respect.
(12) In case, during the continuance of a Proclamation or order pursuant to this
Article, any damage is caused to a person from any act carried out by any official in  bad faith, the victim may, within three months from the date of termination of that
Proclamation or order, file a petition for compensation for such damage. In case such  petition is made, the court may order for compensation by, and punish, the perpetrator  as provided for in the federal law.
(13) The President may, at any time, withdraw a Proclamation or order of a  state of emergency issuance pursuant to this Article.


Part-31
Amendment to Constitution
274.
Amendment to Constitution: (1) No amendment shall be made to this Constitution in  manner to be prejudicial to sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence of Nepal  and sovereignty vested in the people.
(2) Subject to clause (1) and other Articles of this Constitution, a Bill to  amend to or repeal any Article of this Constitution may be introduced in either House  of the Federal Parliament.
Provided that clause (1) shall not be amended.
(3) A Bill introduced pursuant to clause (2) shall be publicly published for  information to public-in-general within thirty days of its introduction in the concerned
House.
(4) In case a Bill introduced pursuant to clause (2) is related with the alteration  in the borders of any Province or matters set forth in Schedule-6, the Speaker or the
Chairperson of the concerned House shall send that Bill to the Provincial Assembly  for its consent, within thirty days after its introduction in the Federal Parliament.
(5) The concerned Provincial Assembly shall, by a majority of the total  number of its the then members, approve or reject the Bill presented for its consent  pursuant to clause (4) and give information thereof to the Federal Parliament within  three months.
Provided that in case any Provincial Assembly is not in existence, such Bill  shall be either approved or rejected within three months after the date of holding of the  first meeting following the formation of that Provincial Assembly.
(6) In the event of failure to give information of approval or rejection of such
Bill within the period set forth in clause (5), nothing shall prevent the House of the
Federal Parliament in which the Bill was originated from proceeding with the Bill.
(7) In case a majority of the Provincial Assemblies gives a notice of rejection  of such Bill to the concerned House of the Federal Parliament within the period  referred to in clause (5), the Bill shall be inoperative.


(8) A Bill which does not require the consent of the Provincial Assembly or a
Bill accepted by a majority of the Provincial Assemblies pursuant to clause (5) shall  be adopted by at least two-thirds majority of the total number of the then members of  both Houses of the Federal Parliament.
(9) A Bill adopted pursuant to clause (8) shall be submitted to the President for  authentication.
(10) The President shall authenticate the Bill submitted pursuant to clause (9)  within fifteen days from the date of its receipt and the Constitution shall get amended  from the date of authentication.


Part-32
Miscellaneous
275.
Provisions relating to Referendum: (1) In case a decision is made by a two-thirds  majority of the total number of the then members of the Federal Parliament that it is  necessary to hold a referendum with respect to any matter of national importance, a  decision on that matter may be taken by way of referendum.
(2) Matters relating to referendum and other relevant matters shall be as  provided for in the federal law.
276.
Pardons: The President may, in accordance with law, grant pardons, suspend,  commute or remit any sentence passed by any Court, judicial or quasi-judicial  institution or administrative authority or institution.
277.
Titles, Honours and Decorations: (1) The President shall confer titles, honours and  decorations to be conferred on behalf of the State.


(2) No citizen of Nepal may, without the approval of the Government of
Nepal, accept any title, honour or decoration from any foreign government.
278. Power to Conclude Treaty: (1) The Federation shall have the power to conclude  treaties or agreements.


(2) In concluding a treaty or agreement on a matter falling within the list of  powers of Province, the Government of Nepal shall be required to consult the  concerned Province.


(3) A Provincial Council of Ministers may, with the consent of the
Government of Nepal, enter into contractual agreements on financial and industrial  matters.
279.
Ratification of, Accession to, Acceptance or Approval of, Treaties or Agreements:  (1)
The ratification of, accession to, acceptance or approval of, treaties or agreements to  which Nepal or the Government of Nepal is to become a party shall be as provided for  in the federal law.
(2) Any law to be made pursuant to clause (1) shall, inter alia, require that the  ratification of, accession to, acceptance or approval of, treaties or agreements on the

following subjects shall be made by a majority of two-thirds of the total number of the  then members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament:-
(a)
Peace and friendship;
(b)
Defence and strategic alliance;
(c)
Boundaries of the Nepal; and
(d)
Natural resources, and the distribution of their uses.
Provided that, out of the treaties or agreements referred to in sub-clauses (a)  and (d), in case any treaty or agreement is of an ordinary nature, which does not affect  the nation extensively, seriously or in the long term, the ratification of, accession to,  acceptance or approval of, such treaty or agreement may be made by a simple  majority of the members present in a meeting of the House of Representatives.
(3) After the commencement of this Constitution, unless a treaty or agreement  is ratified, acceded to, accepted or approved pursuant to this Article, such treaty or  agreement shall not be binding to the Government of Nepal or Nepal.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (1) and (2), no treaty or  agreement that is detrimental to the territorial integrity of Nepal may be concluded.
280.
Special provision relating to Discharge of Functions of President: In case the offices  of both the President and the Vice-President fall vacant in accordance with this
Constitution, the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall discharge the  functions required to be performed by the President under this Constitution until  election to the President or Vice-President is held and he or she assumes office.
281.
Appraisal and Review of Special Rights: The Government of Nepal shall make  appraisal and review of the implementation of special rights of the women and Dalit  community and impacts thereof, on the basis of human development index,  concurrently with a national census to be held in every ten years.
282.
Ambassadors and Special Emissaries: (1) The President may, on the basis of the  principle of inclusion, appoint Nepali ambassadors, and special emissaries for any  specific purposes.


(2) The President shall receive letters of credentials from foreign ambassadors  and diplomatic representatives.


283.
Appointments to be made in accordance with Inclusive Principle: Appointments to  offices of Constitutional Organs and Bodies shall be made in accordance with the  inclusive principle.
284.
Provisions relating to Constitutional Council: (1) There shall be a Constitutional
Council for making recommendations for appointment of the Chief Justice and Chiefs  and officials of the Constitutional Bodies in accordance with this Constitution, which  shall consist of the following as the Chairperson and members:-
(a)
The Prime Minister
- Chairperson
(b)
The Chief Justice
- Member
(c)
The Speaker of the House of Representatives
- Member
(d)
The Chairperson of the National Assembly
- Member
(e)
Leader of Opposition Party in the House of Representatives  - Member
(f)
Deputy Speaker of the House of Representatives
- Member
(2) While making a recommendation for appointment to the office of the Chief
Justice, the Constitutional Council shall include the Minister for Law and Justice of  the Government of Nepal, as its member.
(3) The Constitutional Council shall make a recommendation for appointment  under this Constitution before one month of the vacation of the office of the Chief
Justice or a chief or official of a Constitutional Body.
Provided that in case such office falls vacant because of death or resignation, it  may so make recommendation for appointment that the office is fulfilled within one  month after the date of vacancy.
(4) Other functions, duties and powers of the Constitutional Council and rules  of procedures on the appointment of the Chief Justice or chiefs or officials of
Constitutional Bodies shall be as provided for in the federal law.
(5) The Chief Secretary to the Government of Nepal shall act as the secretary  to the Constitutional Council.
285.
Constitution of Government Service: (1) The Government of Nepal may, in order to  run the administration of the country, constitute the federal civil service and such other

federal government services as may be required. The constitution, operation and  conditions of service of such services shall be as provided for in a Federal Act.


(2) Positions in the federal civil service as well as all federal government  services shall be fulfilled through competitive examinations, on the basis of open and  proportional inclusive principle.


(3) The Provincial Council of Ministers, Rural Municipal Executive and
Municipal Executive may by law constitute and operate various government services  as required for the operation of their administration.
286.
Election Constituency Delimitation Commission: (1) The Government of Nepal may  constitute an Election Constituency Delimitation Commission, to determine election  constituencies for the purpose of election to the members of the Federal Parliament  and members of the Provincial Assemblies in accordance with this Constitution, which  shall consist of the following as the Chairperson and members:-
(a) A retired Justice of Supreme Court
-Chairperson
(b) One Geographer
-Member
(c) One Sociologist or Demographer
-Member
(d) One Administration Expert or Jurist
-Member
(e) Gazetted  special  class  officer  of  the
Government of Nepal.
-Member-secretary
(2) The term of office of the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission  shall be as prescribed at the time of its constitution.
(3) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission in case he or she possesses the  following qualifications:-
(a)
One who has acquired at least bachelor’s degree in related subject  from a recognized university;
(b)
One who has attained the age of forty-five years; and
(c)
One who bears high moral character.


(4) The office of the Chairperson or a member of the Election Constituency
Delimitation Commission shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing;
(b)
In case he or she is removed by the Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers;
(c)
In case he or she dies.
(5) While determining election constituencies pursuant to this Article,  the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall, subject to sub-clause
(a) of clause (1) of Article 84, determine the constituencies in a Province in  accordance with the federal law, having regard to the population as the main  basis and geography as the second basis for representation, and there shall be at  least one election constituency in each district within the Province.
(6) While delimitating election constituencies pursuant to clause (5),  attention shall be required to be given, inter alia,
the population and  geographical convenience, density of population, geographical specificity,  administrative and transportation convenience, community and cultural aspects of the  constituencies.
(7) No question may be raised in any court on any matter of the determination,  or review, of election constituencies made by the Election Constituency Delimitation
Commission.
(8) The Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall submit a report  on the works it has performed to the Government of Nepal.
(9) The Government of Nepal, Council of Ministers, shall lay the report  received pursuant to clause (8) before the Federal Parliament and shall also send it to  the Election Commission for implementation.
(10) The Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall determine its  rules of procedures itself.

 Amended by the First Amendment.
 Inserted by the First Amendment.


(11) The remuneration and facilities of the Chairperson and the members of  the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission shall be similar to those of the
Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners of the Election
Commission, respectively.
(12) The election constituencies delimited pursuant to clause (5) shall be  reviewed in every twenty years.
(13) The Government of Nepal shall provide such employees as may be  required for the Election Constituency Delimitation Commission.
287.
Language Commission: (1) The Government of Nepal shall, within one year of the  commencement of this Constitution, constitute a Language Commission comprising  representation of Provinces.


(2) The Language Commission shall consist of one Chairperson and a required  number of members.


(3) The term of office of the Chairperson and members of the Language
Commission shall be six years from the date of their appointment. They may not be  reappointed.
(4) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Chairperson or a member  of the Language Commission in case he or she possesses the following  qualifications:-
(a)
One who has acquired Master’s degree in related subject from a  recognized university;
(b)
One who has gained at least twenty years of experience in the fields  of study, teaching and research on various languages of Nepal;
(c)
One who has completed the age of forty-five years; and
(d)
One who bears high moral character.
(5) The office of the Chairperson or a member of the Language Commission  shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing;
(b)
In case he or she is removed by the Government of Nepal, Council  of Ministers;


(c)
In case he completes the age of sixty-five years;
(d)
In case he or she dies.


(6)
The functions, duties and powers of the Language Commission shall  be as follows:-
(a)
To determine the criteria to be fulfilled for the recognition as the  official language and make recommendations on languages to the
Government of Nepal;
(b)
To make recommendations to the Government of Nepal, on the  measures to be adopted for the protection, promotion and  development of languages;
(c)
To measure the levels of development of mother tongues and make  suggestions to the Government of Nepal, on the potentiality of their  use in education;
(d)
To conduct study and research on languages and monitor them.
(7) The Language Commission shall complete its tasks referred to in sub- clause (a) of clause (6) within five years after the date of its constitution.
(8) The Government of Nepal may, in coordination with the Provincial
Government, establish a branch of the Language Commission in the Province.
(9) The other functions, duties, powers and rules of procedures of the
Language Commission shall be as provided for in federal law.
288.
Capital: (1) The capital of Nepal shall be located in Kathmandu.
(2) The capital of a Province in accordance with this Constitution shall be as  decided by a two-thirds majority of the number of the then members of the concerned
Provincial Assembly.
(3) The business of a Province shall be conducted through the place as  specified by the Government of Nepal until a decision is made pursuant to clause (2).
289.
Special Provision relating to Citizenship of Officials: (1) In order for a person to be  elected, nominated or appointed to the office of President, Vice-President, Prime
Minister, Chief Justice, of the Speaker of House of Representatives, Chief of


Province, Chief Minister, Speaker of a Provincial Assembly and Chief of a security  body, a person shall have to obtain the citizenship of Nepal by descent.


(2) A person who has obtained the citizenship of Nepal by descent, a person  who has obtained the naturalized citizenship of Nepal or a person who has obtained  the citizenship of Nepal by birth shall also be eligible for the office of a constitutional  body other than those referred to in clause (1).


Provided that a person shall have resided in Nepal for at least ten years in the  case of a person who has obtained the naturalized citizenship of Nepal, and for at least  five years in the case of a person who has obtained the citizenship of Nepal by birth or  who has obtained the naturalized citizenship of Nepal pursuant to clause (6) of Article
11.
290.
Provisions relating to Guthi (trusts): (1) The Federal Parliament shall make necessary  laws in relation to the rights of the trust and the farmers enjoying possessory rights  over trust land in a manner not to be prejudicial to the basic norms of the trusts.


(2) Other matters relating to trusts shall be as provided by the federal law.
291.
Not to be Eligible for Appointment: (1) Notwithstanding anything contained  elsewhere in this Constitution, a citizen of Nepal who has obtained a foreign  permanent residence permit shall not be eligible for election, nomination or  appointment to an office to be elected, nominated or appointed in accordance with this
Constitution.


Provided that nothing shall prevent electing, nominating or appointing a  person who has renounced such foreign permanent residence permit to such office  after the expiry of a period of at least three months.


(2) Other matters relating to the citizens of Nepal who have obtained foreign  permanent residence permits as referred to in clause (1) shall be as provided for in  federal law.
292.
Provisions relating to Parliamentary Hearings: (1) Parliamentary hearings shall be  conducted as to appointments to the offices of the Chief Justice and Justices of the
Supreme Court, members of the Judicial Council, chiefs and members of
Constitutional Bodies, who are appointed on the recommendation of the


Constitutional Council under this Constitution, and to the offices of ambassadors, as  provided for in the federal law.


(2) For the purposes of clause (1), there shall be constituted a fifteen-member  joint committee consisting of members of both Houses of the Federal Parliament, in  accordance with the federal law.


(3) No member of the joint committee referred to in clause (2) shall practice  law in the Supreme Court during that term of the Federal Parliament.
293.
Monitoring of Functioning of Constitutional Bodies: The chiefs and officials of the
Constitutional Bodies shall be accountable and responsible to the Federal Parliament.
The committees of the House of Representatives may monitor and evaluate the  functioning, including reports, of the Constitutional Bodies, other than the National
Human Rights Commission, and give necessary direction or advice.
294.
Annual Reports of Constitutional Bodies: (1) Every Constitutional Body in  accordance with this Constitution shall submit an annual report of its functioning to  the President, and the President shall cause that report to be laid through the Prime
Minister before the Federal Parliament.


(2) The matters to be set out in the annual report referred to in clause (1) shall  be as provided for in federal law.


(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), a Constitutional Body  may prepare a separate report in relation to the functioning of each Province and  submit it to the Chief of Province.


Part-33
Transitional Provisions
295.
Constitution of Federal Commission: (1) The Government of Nepal may constitute a
Federal Commission for making suggestions on matters relating to the boundaries of
Provinces.


(2) The names of the Provinces referred to in clause (3) of Article 56 shall be  set by a two thirds majority of the total number of members of the concerned
Provincial Assemblies.


(3) The Government of Nepal shall constitute a Commission for the  determination of the number and boundaries of Rural Municipalities, Municipalities  and Special, Protected or Autonomous Regions to be formed pursuant to clauses (4)  and (5) of Article 56. The Commission shall determine the number and boundaries of  the Rural Municipalities, Municipalities and Special, Protected or Autonomous
Regions in accordance with the criteria set by the Government of Nepal.


(4) The Commission referred to in clause (3) shall be constituted within six  months of the date of commencement of this Constitution. The term of such
Commission shall be one year.
296.
Constituent Assembly to be converted into Legislature-Parliament: (1) The
Constituent Assembly existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall  ipso facto be converted into the Legislature-Parliament after the commencement of  this Constitution, and the term of that Legislature-Parliament shall exist until 21
January 2018  (7 Magha 2074).


Provided that in case an election is to be held to the House of Representatives  set forth in this Constitution prior to the expiration of that term, the Legislature-
Parliament shall continue to exist until the day before the day specified for the filing  of nominations of candidates for that election.


(2) The Bills under consideration of the Legislature-Parliament at the time of  commencement of this Constitution shall ipso facto be transferred to the Legislature-
Parliament set forth in clause (1).


(3) The Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1) shall perform the  business required to be performed by the Federal Parliament in accordance with this
Constitution until election to the House of Representatives is held in accordance with  this Constitution.


(4) The legislative power of the Provincial Assembly with respect of matters  set forth in Schedule-6 shall, upon the commencement of this Constitution, be vested  in the Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1) until the Provincial Assembly is  constituted. Any law so made shall be inoperative in relation to that Province after  one year of the date of constitution of the Provincial Assembly set forth in this
Constitution.


(5) The Legislature-Parliament Secretariat, its Secretary General, Secretary  and employees existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall,  subject to the conditions of service in force at the time of their appointment, exist in  the Federal Parliament Secretariat set forth in this Constitution.


(6) Where the Legislature-Parliament is in recess at the time of  commencement of this Constitution, the President shall summon its session within  seven days after the date of commencement of this Constitution. The President shall,  thereafter, summon a session of the Legislature-Parliament from time to time.
297.
Provisions relating to President and Vice-President: (1) The President and the Vice-
President existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall continue to  hold their respective offices until other President and Vice-President are elected  pursuant to this Article.


(2) The Legislature-Parliament set forth in clause (1) of Article 296 shall, on  the basis of political understanding, elect the President and the Vice-President, within  one month after the date of the commencement of this Constitution where the
Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time of commencement of this
Constitution and after the date on which the session is summoned pursuant to clause
(6) of Article 296 where the Legislature-Parliament is in recess.


(3) In the event of failure to have an understanding pursuant to clause (2), the
President and the Vice-President shall be elected by a majority of all the then  members of the Legislature-Parliament.


(4) In case the office of the President or Vice-President elected pursuant to  clause (2) or (3) falls vacant for any reason, the President or Vice-President shall be  elected by the Legislature-Parliament pursuant to this Article until the Federal
Parliament is constituted.


(5) The term of office of the President or Vice-President elected pursuant to  this Article shall continue to exist until another President or Vice-President elected by  an electoral college set forth in Article 62 assumes office.


(6) The office of the President or Vice-President elected pursuant to this
Article shall fall vacant in any of the following circumstances: -
(a)
In case the President tenders resignation in writing to the Vice-
President and the Vice-President, to the President;
(b)
In case a motion of impeachment against him or her is adopted  pursuant to clause (7);
(c)
In case another President or Vice-President elected by an electoral  college set forth in Article 62 assumes office;
(d)
In case he or she dies.
(7) At least one fourth of the total number of the then members of the
Legislature-Parliament referred to in clause (1) of Article 296 may move a motion of  impeachment against the President or Vice-President elected pursuant to this Article  on the ground of serious violation of this Constitution and law. In case the motion is  adopted by at least two-thirds majority of the total number of the then members of the
Legislature-Parliament, he or she shall be relieved of his or her office
298.
Provisions relating to Constitution of Council of Ministers: (1) The Council of
Ministers existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall continue to  exist until the Council of Ministers referred to clause (2) is constituted.


(2) The Prime Minister shall, on the basis of political understanding, be  elected within seven days after the date of the commencement of this Constitution  where the Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time of commencement of this
Constitution, and after the date on which the session of the Legislature-Parliament  summoned pursuant to clause (6) of Article 296 commences where the Legislature-


Parliament is in recess, and a Council of Ministers shall be constituted under his or  her chairpersonship.


(3) In the event of failure to have an understanding pursuant to clause (2), the
Prime Minister shall be elected by a majority of all the then members of the
Legislature-Parliament.


(4) The a composition and allocation of portfolios of the Council of Ministers  to be constituted pursuant to this Article shall be made through mutual understanding.


(5) The Council of Ministers to be constituted pursuant to this Article shall  consist of a Deputy Prime Minister and other Ministers, as required.


(6) The Prime Minister appointed pursuant to this Article shall, in appointing
Ministers pursuant to clause (5), appoint Ministers from amongst the members of the
Legislature-Parliament, on the recommendation of the concerned party.


(7) The Prime Minister and other Ministers appointed pursuant to this Article  shall be collectively responsible to the Legislature-Parliament, and the Ministers shall  be individually responsible to the Prime Minister and the Legislature- Parliament for  the works of their respective Ministries.


(8) The office of the Prime Minister appointed pursuant to this Article shall  fall vacant in any of the following circumstances:-
(a)  In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the President;
(b)
In case a vote of no confidence is adopted against him or her pursuant  to clause (14) or a vote of confidence is not adopted;
(c)
In case he or she ceases to be a member of the Legislature-Parliament;
(d)
In case he or she dies.


(9) The office of the Deputy Prime Minister, Minister, Minister of State and
Assistance Minister appointed pursuant to this Article shall fall vacant in any of the  following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she tenders resignation in writing to the Prime Minister;
(b)
In case the Prime Minister is removed from office pursuant to clause
(8);


(c)
In case he or she is removed from office by the Prime Minister on the  recommendation or on advice of the concerned party;
(d)
In case he or she dies.
(10) Even though the office of the Prime Minister falls vacant pursuant to  clause (8), the same Council of Ministers shall continue to act until another Council of
Ministers is constituted.
(11) In case the Prime Minister appointed pursuant to this Article dies, the
Deputy Prime Minister or senior-most Minister shall act as the Prime Minister until  another Prime Minister is appointed.


(12) The Prime Minister appointed pursuant to this Article may, whenever he  or she considers necessary or appropriate to clarify that he or she has confidence from  the Legislature-Parliament, table a motion to that effect in the Legislature-Parliament  for the vote of confidence.
(13) At least one-fourth of the total number of the then members of the
Legislature-Parliament may table in writing a motion of no confidence against the
Prime Minister appointed pursuant to this Article.
Provided that a motion of no confidence shall not be tabled more than once in  six moths' period against the same Prime Minister appointed pursuant to this Article.
(14) A motion tabled pursuant to clause (12) or (13) shall be decided by a  majority of the total number of the then members of the Legislature Parliament.
(15) The Government of Nepal shall, after the commencement of this
Constitution, exercise the executive powers of a Province until the Council of
Ministers of the Province set forth in this Constitution is constituted.
299.
Provisions relating to Speaker and Deputy Speaker: (1) The Speaker and Deputy
Speaker existing at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall continue to  hold their respective offices until another Speaker and Deputy Speaker is elected in  accordance with this Constitution.


(2) The members of the Legislature-Parliament shall, on the basis of political  understanding, elect one Speaker and Deputy Speaker from among themselves within  twenty days after the date of the commencement of this Constitution where the
Legislature-Parliament is not in recess at the time of commencement of this


Constitution, and after the date on which the session of the Legislature-Parliament is  summoned pursuant to clause (6) of Article 296 where the Legislature-Parliament is  in recess.


(3) In the event of failure to have an understanding pursuant to clause (2), a  member of the Legislature-Parliament who commands a majority of all the then  members of the Legislature-Parliament shall be deemed to be elected as the Speaker  or Deputy Speaker.


(4) In holding electing pursuant to clause (2) or (3), the Speaker and Deputy
Speaker shall be members representing different political parties in the Legislature-
Parliament.


(5) In discharging his or her functions in accordance with this Constitution, the
Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall so discharge functions in the capacity of a neutral  person without standing for or against any political party whatsoever.


(6) The office of the Speaker and Deputy Speaker shall fall vacant in any of  the following circumstances:-
(a)
In case he or she resigns in writing;
(b)
In case he or she ceases to be a member of the Legislature-Parliament;
(c)
In case a motion is adopted by a majority of at least two-thirds of the  total number of the members of the Legislature-Parliament to the  effect that his or her conduct is not compatible with his or her office;
(d)
In case he or she dies.
(7) The Deputy Speaker or another member shall preside over a meeting at  which deliberations are to be held on a motion that the conduct of the Speaker of the
Legislature-Parliament is not compatible with his or her office, and the Speaker may  take part and vote in the deliberations on such motion.
(8) Other procedures on the election to the Speaker and Deputy Speaker and  procedures on the moving and adoption of a motion that the Speaker or Deputy
Speaker has committed conduct not compatible with his or her office shall be as  provided by the then prevailing rules of the Legislature-Parliament.


300.
Provisions relating to Judiciary: (1) The Supreme Court, Constituent Assembly Court,
Appellate Courts and District Courts existing at the time of commencement of this
Constitution shall continue to exist until the structure of Judiciary set forth in this
Constitution is set up. Nothing in this Constitution shall be deemed to bar the  settlement by respective Courts of the cases already filed in such Courts prior to the  commencement of this Constitution and of the cases to be filed after the  commencement of this Constitution.


(2) The Chief Justice and Justices of the Supreme Court, Chief Judges and
Judges of the Appellate Courts and Judges of the District Courts at the time of  commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed under  this Constitution.


(3) The High Courts set forth in Article 139 shall be established within one  year after the date of commencement of this Constitution. The Appellate Courts existing  at the time of commencement of this Constitution shall be dissolved after the  establishment of such Courts.
(4) After the establishment of the High Courts pursuant to clause (3), the cases  sub judice in the Appellate Courts shall be transferred to such High Courts as  specified by the Government of Nepal, in consultation with the Judicial Council, by a  notification in the Nepal Gazette.
(5) After the establishment of the High Courts pursuant to clause (3), the Chief
Justice shall, on recommendation of the Judicial Council, post the Chief Judges and
Judges of the Appellate Courts who are holding office at the time of commencement  of this Constitution to the offices of the Chief Judges and Judges of the High Courts.
(6) The Additional Judges of the Appellate Courts who are holding office at  the time of commencement of this Constitution may continue to hold office until the  term specified at the time of their appointment.
(7) The cases on criminal offences punishable by imprisonment for a term of  more than one year and sub judice in any body other than a Court at the time of  commencement of this Constitution shall, after the commencement of this
Constitution, be transferred to the concerned District Court.
301.
Provisions relating to Constitutional Bodies and Officials thereof: (1) The
Constitutional Bodies which are existing at the time of commencement of this


Constitution and provided in this Constitution shall be deemed to have been formed in  accordance with this Constitution, and nothing shall be deemed to bar the settlement  of the matters under consideration of such Bodies subject to this Constitution.


(2) The chiefs or officials of the Constitutional Bodies holding office at the  time of commencement of this Constitution shall be deemed to have been appointed in  accordance with this Constitution and shall continue to hold their respective offices  subject to the conditions of services at the time of their appointments.


(3) The officials holding office in the Commission for the Investigation of the
Abuse of Authority and the Public Service Commission, at the time of commencement  of this Constitution, in excess of the number specified in this Constitution, shall  continue to hold their respective offices subject to the conditions of services at the  time of their appointments.
302.
Formation and Operation of Government Services at Province and Local Levels: (1)
The Government of Nepal shall make necessary provisions for the delivery of services  at the Province and Local Levels.


(2) The Government of Nepal may, in making provisions pursuant to clause
(1), arrange for the delivery of services by making adjustment of the employees  serving in the government services at the time of commencement of this Constitution  with the Federal, Provincial and Local Levels in accordance with law.
303.
Provisions relating to Local Bodies: (1) The Local Bodies existing at the time of  commencement of this Constitution shall continue to exist until the determination of  the number and areas of the Local Level in accordance with this Constitution.


(2) Election to the officials of the Local Bodies existing pursuant to clause (1)  shall be held in accordance with law.


(3) The officials of the Local Bodies elected in pursuant to clause (2) shall  continue to hold office until election to the Local Level is held in accordance with this
Constitution.
304.
Existing Laws to Remain in Force: (1) The Nepal laws in force at the time of  commencement of this Constitution shall continue to be in force until such laws are  repealed or amended.


Provided that any law, which is inconsistent with this Constitution, shall ipso  facto be void to the extent of such inconsistency, after one year of the date on which  the first session of the Federal Parliament set forth in this Constitution is held.
(2) Acts relating to peace process in accordance with the Interim Constitution  of Nepal, 2007 shall be deemed to be carried out in accordance with this Constitution.
305.
Power to Remove Difficulties: In case any difficulty arises in connection with the  implementation of this Constitution until the commencement of the first session of the
Federal Parliament, upon being elected in accordance with this Constitution, the
President may, on the recommendation of the Government of Nepal, Council of
Ministers, issue necessary orders to remove such difficulty; and such orders shall be  submitted to the Legislature-Parliament or Federal Parliament, held immediately after  the issue such orders, for approval.


Part-34
Definitions and Interpretations
306.
Definitions and Interpretations: (1) Unless the subject or the context otherwise  requires, in this Constitution,-
(a)
"Minority" means ethnic, linguistic and religious groups whose  population is less than the percentage specified by the federal law, and  includes groups that have their distinct ethnic, religious or linguistic  characteristics, aspirations to protect such characteristics and subjected  to discrimination and oppression.
(b)
"Law" means federal law, provincial law and local law.
(c)
"Article" means an Article of this Constitution.
(d)
"Municipality" means and includes a Metropolitan City and Sub-
Metropolitan City.
(e)
"Citizen" means a citizen of Nepal.
(f)
"Province" means the area and form of a federal unit of Nepal divided  into the federal units in accordance with this Constitution.
(g)
"Remuneration" means and includes salary, allowance, pension and  any other form of emolument and facility.
(h)
"State power" means the power relating to the Executive, Legislative  and Judiciary of the State, and includes residuary power as well.
(i)
"Bill" means a draft of amendment to the Constitution or of an Act,  which has been introduced in the Federal Parliament or a Provincial
Assembly, as the case may be.
(j)
"Federation" means the federal level that is the apex unit of the federal  structure.
(k)
"Federal Units" means the Federation, Province and Local Level.
(l)
"Constitutional Bodies" means the Commission for the Investigation of
Abuse of Authority, Auditor General, Public Service Commission,


Election Commission, National Human Rights Commission, National
Natural Resources and Fiscal Commission, National Women
Commission,
National
Dalit
Commission,
National
Inclusion
Commission,
Indigenous
Nationalities
Commission,
Madhesi
Commission, Tharu Commission and Muslim Commission.
(m)
"Marginalized" means communities that are made politically,  economically and socially backward, are unable to enjoy services and  facilities because of discrimination and oppression and of geographical  remoteness or deprived thereof and are in lower status than the human  development standards under federal law, and includes highly  marginalized groups and groups on the verge of extinction.
(n)
"Local Level" means the Rural Municipality, Municipality and District
Assembly to be established in accordance with this Constitution.
(2) Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, the legal provisions  relating to interpretation of laws shall, subject to the provisions of this Constitution,  apply to the interpretation of this Constitution in the same manner as that provisions  apply to the interpretation of the Nepal laws.


Part-35
Short Title, Commencement and Repeal
307.
Short Title and Commencement: (1) This Constitution may be cited as the
“Constitution of Nepal".


(2) This Constitution shall commence on Twenty September, Two Thousand
Fifteen A.D. (corresponding to the third day of the month of Ashwin of the year Two
Thousand Seventy Two of Bikram Era).
308.
Repeal: The Interim Constitution of Nepal, 2007 is hereby repealed.


Schedule-1
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 8)
National Flag of Nepal


The method of making the National Flag of Nepal
(a)
Method of making the shape inside the border
(1)
On the lower portion of a crimson cloth draw a line AB of the required length  from left to right.
(2)
From A draw a line AC perpendicular to AB making AC equal to AB plus one  third AB. From AC mark off D making line AD equal to line AB. Join B and
D.
(3)
From BD mark off E making BE equal to AB.
(4)
Touching E draw a line FG, starting from the point F on line AC, and parallel  to AB to the right hand-side. Mark off FG equal to AB.
(5)
Join C and G.
(b)
Method of making the moon
(6)
From AB mark off AH making AH equal to one-fourth of line AB and starting  from H draw a line HI parallel to line AC touching line CG at point I.
(7)
Bisect CF at J and draw a line JK parallel to AB touching CG at point K.


(8)
Let L be the point where lines JK and HI cut one another.
(9)
Join J and G.
(10)
Let M be the point where line JG and HI cut one another.
(11)
With centre M and with a distance shortest from M to BD mark off N on the  lower portion of line HI.
(12)
Touching M and starting from O, a point on AC, draw a line from left to right  parallel to AB.
(13)
With centre L and radius LN draw a semi-circle on the lower portion and let P  and Q be the points where it touches the line OM respectively.
(14)
With centre M and radius MQ draw a semi-circle on the lower portion touching
P and Q.
(15)
With centre N and radius NM draw an arc touching PNQ at R and S. Join RS.
Let T be the point where RS and HI cut one another.
(16)
With centre T and radius TS draw a semi-circle on the upper portion of PNQ  touching it at two points.
(17)
With centre T and radius TM draw an arc on the upper portion of PNQ  touching at two points.
(18)
Eight equal and similar triangles of the moon are to be made in the space lying  inside the semi-circle of No. (16) and outside the arc of No. (17) of this
Schedule.
(c)
Method of making the sun
(19)
Bisect line AF at U, and draw a line UV parallel to AB line touching line BE at
V.
(20)
With centre W, the point where HI and UV cut one another and radius MN  draw a circle.
(21)
With centre W and radius LN draw a circle.
(22)
Twelve equal and similar triangles of the sun are to be made in the space  enclosed by the circles of No. (20) and of No. (21) with the two apexes of two  triangles touching line HI.


(d)
Method of making the border
(23)
The width of the border will be equal to the width TN. This will be of deep blue  colour and will be provided on all the side of the flag. However, on the five  angles of the flag the external angles will be equal to the internal angles.
(24)
The above-mentioned border will be provided in case the flag is to be used with  a rope. On the other hand, in case it is to be hoisted on a pole, the hole on the  border on the side AC can be extended in accordance with requirements.
Explanation: The lines HI, RS, FE, ED, JG, OQ, JK and UV are imaginary. Similarly,  the external and internal circles of the sun and the other arcs except the crescent moon  are also imaginary. These are not shown on the flag.
Note: The size of the National Flag of Nepal shall be as determined by the Government of
Nepal.


Schedule-2
(Relating to clause (1) of Article 9)
National Anthem of Nepal

Sayaun Thunga Phool Ka Hami Eutai Mala Nepali
Sarvavhaum Vai Failiyeka Mechi Mahakali
Prakitika Koti Koti Sampada Ko Aanchala
Bir Haruka Ragata Le Swatantra Ra Atala
Gyana Bhumi Shanti Bhumi Terai Pahad Himala
Akhanda Yo Pyaro Hamro Matri Bhumi Nepal
Bahul Jati Bhasa Dharma Sanskriti Chan Bishala
Agragami Rastra Hamro Jaya Jaya Nepal.


Schedule-3
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 9)
Coat of Arms of Nepal





Note:
This Coat of Arms may be made in larger or smaller size as may be necessary.
The colours determined by the Government of Nepal shall be used on it.




  Amended by the Second Amendment.


Schedule-4
(Relating to clause (3) of Article 56)
Provinces, and Districts to be included in the concerned Provinces

Province No. 1
Province No. 2
1. Taplejung
2. Panchthar
3. Ilam
4. Sankhuwasabha
5. Tehrathum
6. Dhankuta
7. Bhojpur
8. Khotang
9. Solukhumbu
10. Okhaldhunga
11. Udayapur
12. Jhapa
13. Morang
14. Sunsari
1. Saptari
2. Siraha
3. Dhanusa
4. Mahottari
5. Sarlahi
6. Rautahat
7. Bara
8. Parsa



Province No. 3
Province No. 4
1. Dolakha
2. Ramechhap
3. Sindhuli
4. Kavrepalanchok
5. Sindhupalchok
6. Rasuwa
7.Nuwakot
8. Dhading
9. Chitwan
10. Makawanpur
11. Bhaktapur
12. Lalitpur
13. Kathmandu
1. Gorkha
2. Lamjung
3. Tanahun
4. Kaski
5. Manang
6. Mustang
7. Parbat
8. Syangja
9. Myagdi
10. Baglung
11.Nawalparasi (East of Bardaghat
Susta)


Province No. 5
Province No. 6
Province No. 7
1.Nawalparasi (West of
Bardaghat Susta)
2. Rupandehi
3. Kapilbastu
4. Palpa
5. Arghakhanchi
6. Gulmi
7. Rukun (Eastern Part)
8. Rolpa
9. Pyuthan
10. Daang
11. Banke
12. Bardiya
1.Rukum (Western Part)
2. Salyan
3. Dolpa
4. Jumla
5. Mugu
6. Humla
7. Kalikot
8. Jajarkot
9. Dailekh
10. Surkhet
1.Bajura
2.Bajhang
3. Doti
4. Achham
5. Darchula
6. Baitadi
7. Dadeldhura
8. Kanchanpur
9. Kailali



Schedule-5
(Relating to clause (1) of Article 57, and Article 109)
List of Federal Powers
S.N.
Matters
1.
Relating to defence and military
(a) Protection of national unity and territorial integrity
(b) Relating to national security
2.
War and defence
3.
Arms and ammunitions factories and production thereof
4.
Central Police, Armed Police Force, national intelligence and investigation, law  and order.
5.
Central planning, central bank, financial policies, monetary and banking,  monetary policies, foreign grants, aid and loans
6.
Foreign and diplomatic affairs, international relations and United Nations related  matters
7.
International treaties or agreements, extradition, mutual legal assistance and  international borders, international boundary rivers
8.
Telecommunications, allocation of radio frequency, radio, television and postal  matters
9.
Customs, excise-duty, value-added tax, corporate income tax, individual income  tax, remuneration tax, passport fee, visa fee, tourism fee, service charge and fee,  penalty
10.
Federal civil service, judicial service and other government services
11.
Policies relating to conservation and multiple uses of water resources


12.
Inland and inter-Province electricity transmission lines
13.
Central statistics (national and international standards and quality)
14.
Central level large electricity, irrigation and other projects
15.
Central universities, central level academies, universities standards and  regulation, central libraries
16.
Health policies, health services, health standards, quality and monitoring, national  or specialised service providing hospitals, traditional treatment services and  communicable disease control
17.
Federal Parliament, Federal Executive, Local Level related affairs, special  structure
18.
International trade, exchange, port, quarantine
19.
Civil aviation, international airports
20.
National transportation policies, management of railways and national highways
21.
Laws relating to the Supreme Court, High Courts, District Courts and  administration of justice
22.
Citizenship, passport, visa, immigration
23.
Atomic energy, air space and astronomy
24.
Intellectual property (including patents, designs, trademarks and copyrights)
25.
Measurement
26.
Mines excavation
27.
National and international environment management, national parks, wildlife  reserves and wetland, national forest policies, carbon services
28.
Insurance policies, securities, cooperatives regulation
29.
Land use policies, human settlement development policies, tourism policies,

environment adaptation
30.
Enactment of Criminal and civil laws
31.
Security printing
32.
Social security and poverty alleviation
33.
Constitutional Bodies, Commissions of national importance
34.
Sites of archaeological importance and ancient monuments
35.
Any matter not enumerated in the Lists of Federal Powers, Province Powers and
Local Level Powers or in the Concurrent List and any matter not specified in this
Constitution and in federal laws



Schedule-6
(Relating to clause (2) of Article 57, clause (4) of Article 162, Article 197, clause (3) of
Article 231, clause (7) of Article 232, clause (4) of Article 274 and clause (4) of Article
296)
List of Provincial Powers
S.N.
Matters
1.
Provincial police administration and law and order
2.
Operation of banks and financial institutions in accordance with the policies of
Nepal Rastra Bank, cooperative institutions, foreign grants and assistance with the  consent of the Centre
3.
Operation of Radio, F.M., television
4.
Housing and land registration fee, motor vehicle tax, entertainment tax,  advertisement tax, tax on tourism, agro-income, service charge, fee, penalty
5.
Provincial civil service and other government services
6.
Provincial statistics
7.
Province level electricity, irrigation and water supply services, navigation
8.
Provincial universities, higher education, libraries, museums
9.
Health services
10.
Matters relating to the Provincial Assembly, Provincial Council of Ministers
11.
Intra-Province trade
12.
Provincial highways
13.
Provincial Bureau of Investigation
14.
Physical management and other necessary matters of Provincial governmental

offices
15.
Provincial Public Service Commission
16.
Management of land, land records
17.
Exploration and management of mines
18.
Protection and use of languages, scripts, cultures, fine arts and religions
19.
Use of forests and waters and management of environment within the Province
20.
Agriculture and livestock development, factories, industrialization, trade, business,  transportation
21.
Management of trusts (Guthi)



Schedule-7
(Relating to clause (3) of Articles 57, Article 109, clause (4) of Article 162, and Article
197)
List of Concurrent Powers of Federation and Province
S.N.
Matters
1.
Civil and criminal procedure, evidence and oaths (legal recognition, public acts and  records, and judicial proceedings)
2.
Supply, distribution, price control, quality and monitoring of essential goods and  services
3.
Preventive detention for reasons connected with the security of the country, prison and  detention management, and maintenance of peace and order
4.
Transfer of accused persons, detainees and prisoners from one Province to another
Province
5.
Laws relating to family affairs (marriage, transfer of property, divorce, persons on the  verge of extinction, orphan, adoption, succession and joint family)
6.
Acquisition, requisitioning of property and creation of right in property
7.
Contracts, cooperatives, partnership and agency related matters
8.
Matters relating to bankruptcy and insolvency
9.
Drugs and pesticides
10.
Planning, family planning and population management
11.
Social security and employment, trade unions, settlement of industrial disputes, labour  rights and disputes related matters
12.
Legal profession, auditing, engineering, medicines, Ayurvedic medicines, veterinary,
Amchi and other professions
13.
Provincial boundary river, waterways, environment protection, biological diversity


14.
Matters related to means of communication
15.
Industries and mines and physical infrastructures
16.
Casino, lottery
17.
Preparedness for, rescue and relief during, and recovery from, natural and non-natural  disasters.
18.
Tourism, water supply and sanitation
19.
Motion pictures, cinema halls and sports
20.
Insurance business operation and management
21.
Poverty alleviation and industrialization
22.
Scientific research, science and technology and human resources development
23.
Utilization of forests, Himalayan (mountains), forest conservation areas and waters  stretching in inter-provincial form
24.
Land policies and laws relating thereto
25.
Employment and unemployment benefit



Schedule-8
(Relating to clause (4) of Article 57, clause (2) of Article 214, clause (2) of Article 221  and clause (1) of Article 226)
List of Local Level Powers
S.N.
Matters
1.
Town police
2.
Cooperative institutions
3.
Operation of F.M.
4.
Local taxes (property tax, house rent tax, land and building registration fee, motor  vehicle tax), service charge, fee, tourism fee, advertisement tax, business tax, land  tax (land revenue), penalty, entertainment tax, land revenue collection
5.
Management of the Local services
6.
Collection of local statistics and records
7.
Local Level development plans and projects
8.
Basic and secondary education
9.
Basic health and sanitation
10.
Local market management, environment protection and bio-diversity
11.
Local roads, rural roads, agro-roads, irrigation

12.
Rural Municipal Assembly, Municipal Assembly, District Assembly, local courts,  management of mediation and arbitration
13.
Local records management


14.
Distribution of house and land ownership certificates
15.
Agriculture and animal husbandry, agro-products management, animal health,  cooperatives
16.
Management of senior citizens, persons with disabilities and the incapacitated
17.
Collection of statistics of the unemployed
18.
Management, operation and control of agricultural extension
19.
Water supply, small hydropower projects, alternative energy
20.
Disaster management
21.
Conservation of watersheds, wildlife, mines and minerals
22.
Protection and development of languages, cultures and fine arts



Schedule-9
(Relating to clause (5) of Article 57, Article 109, clause (4) of Article 162, Article 197,  clause (2) of Article 214, clause (2) of Article 221, and clause (1) of Article 226)
List of Concurrent Powers of Federation, Province and Local Level
S.N.
Matters
1.
Cooperatives
2.
Education, sports and newspapers
3.
Health
4.
Agriculture
5.
Services such as electricity, water supply, irrigation
6.
Service fee, charge, penalty and royalty from natural resources, tourism fee
7.
Forests, wildlife, birds, water uses, environment, ecology and bio-diversity
8.
Mines and minerals
9.
Disaster management
10.
Social security and poverty alleviation
11.
Personal events, births, deaths, marriages and statistics
12.
Archaeology, ancient monuments and museums
13.
Squatters management
14.
Royalty from natural resources
15.
Motor vehicle permits